\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename slime.info
@settitle The Superior Lisp Interaction Mode for Emacs
@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* SLIME: (slime).    Superior Lisp Interaction Mode for Emacs.
@end direntry
@c %**end of header

@c Written by Luke Gorrie.
@c
@c This file has been placed in the public domain.

@macro SLIME
@acronym{SLIME}
@end macro

@macro SLDB
@acronym{SLDB}
@end macro

@macro REPL
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro CVS
@acronym{CVS}
@end macro

@macro kbditem{key, command}
@item \key\
@code{\command\}@*
@end macro

@set EDITION 2.0
@set UPDATED @code{$Date: 2006/09/20 18:37:47 $}

@titlepage
@title SLIME User Manual
@subtitle The Superior Lisp Interaction Mode for Emacs
@subtitle @value{EDITION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author
@end titlepage

@c @setchapternewpage off

@contents

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
@top SLIME

@SLIME{} is the ``Superior Lisp Interaction Mode for Emacs''. This is
the manual for version 1.2.

@end ifinfo
@menu
* Introduction::                
* Getting started::             
* slime-mode::                  
* REPL::                        
* Debugger::                    
* Extras::                      
* Customization::               
* Tips and Tricks::             
* Credits::                     
@end menu

@node Introduction, Getting started, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

@SLIME{} is the ``Superior Lisp Interaction Mode for Emacs.''

@SLIME{} extends Emacs with new support for interactive programming in
Common Lisp. The features are centered around @code{slime-mode}, an Emacs
minor-mode that complements the standard @code{lisp-mode}. While
@code{lisp-mode} supports editing Lisp source files, @code{slime-mode}
adds support for interacting with a running Common Lisp process for
compilation, debugging, documentation lookup, and so on.

The @code{slime-mode} programming environment follows the example of
Emacs's native Emacs Lisp environment. We have also included good
ideas from similar systems (such as @acronym{ILISP}) and some new
ideas of our own.

@SLIME{} is constructed from two parts: a user-interface written in
Emacs Lisp, and a supporting server program written in Common
Lisp. The two sides are connected together with a socket and
communicate using an @acronym{RPC}-like protocol.

The Lisp server is primarily written in portable Common Lisp. The
required implementation-specific functionality is specified by a
well-defined interface and implemented separately for each Lisp
implementation. This makes @SLIME{} readily portable.

@node Getting started, slime-mode, Introduction, Top
@chapter Getting started

This chapter tells you how to get @SLIME{} up and running.

@menu
* Platforms::                   
* Downloading::                 
* Installation::                
* Running::                     
@end menu

@node Platforms, Downloading, Getting started, Getting started
@section Supported Platforms

@SLIME{} supports a wide range of operating systems and Lisp
implementations. @SLIME{} runs on Unix systems, Mac OSX, and Microsoft
Windows. GNU Emacs versions 20 and 21 and XEmacs version 21 are
supported.

The supported Lisp implementations, roughly ordered from the
best-supported, are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
CMU Common Lisp (@acronym{CMUCL}), 18e or newer
@item
Steel Bank Common Lisp (@acronym{SBCL}), latest official release
@item
OpenMCL, version 0.14.3
@item
LispWorks, version 4.3 or newer
@item
Allegro Common Lisp (@acronym{ACL}), version 6 or newer
@item
@acronym{CLISP}, version 2.33.2 or newer
@item
Armed Bear Common Lisp (@acronym{ABCL})
@item
Corman Common Lisp (@acronym{CCL}), version 2.51 or newer with the patches from @url{http://www.grumblesmurf.org/lisp/corman-patches})
@item
Scieneer Common Lisp (@acronym{SCL}), version 1.2.7 or newer
@end itemize

Most features work uniformly across implementations, but some are
prone to variation. These include the precision of placing
compiler-note annotations, @acronym{XREF} support, and fancy debugger
commands (like ``restart frame'').

@node Downloading, Installation, Platforms, Getting started
@section Downloading SLIME

You can choose between using a released version of @SLIME{} or
accessing our @CVS{} repository directly. You can download the latest
released version from our website:

@url{http://www.common-lisp.net/project/slime/}

We recommend that users who participate in the @code{slime-devel}
mailing list use the @CVS{} version of the code.

@menu
* CVS::                         
* CVS Incantations::            
@end menu

@node CVS, CVS Incantations, Downloading, Downloading
@subsection Downloading from CVS

@SLIME{} is available from the @CVS{} repository on
@file{common-lisp.net}. You have the option to use either the very
latest code or the tagged @code{FAIRLY-STABLE} snapshot.

The latest version tends to have more features and fewer bugs than the
@code{FAIRLY-STABLE} version, but it can be unstable during times of
major surgery. As a rule-of-thumb recommendation we suggest that if
you follow the @code{slime-devel} mailing list then you're better off
with the latest version (we'll send a note when it's undergoing major
hacking). If you don't follow the mailing list you won't know the
status of the latest code, so tracking @code{FAIRLY-STABLE} or using a
released version is the safe option.

If you checkout from @CVS{} then remember to @code{cvs update}
occasionally.  Improvements are continually being committed, and the
@code{FAIRLY-STABLE} tag is moved forward from time to time (about
once per month).

@menu
* CVS Incantations::            
@end menu

@node CVS Incantations,  , CVS, Downloading
@subsection CVS incantations

To download @SLIME{} you first configure your @code{CVSROOT} and login
to the repository.

@example
export CVSROOT=:pserver:anonymous@@common-lisp.net:/project/slime/cvsroot
cvs login
@end example
@emph{(The password is @code{anonymous})}

The latest version can then be checked out with:
@example
cvs checkout slime
@end example

Or the @code{FAIRLY-STABLE} version can be checked out with:

@example
cvs checkout -rFAIRLY-STABLE slime
@end example

If you want to find out what's new since the version you're currently
running, you can diff the local @file{ChangeLog} against the
repository version:

@example
cvs diff -rHEAD ChangeLog      # or: -rFAIRLY-STABLE
@end example

@node Installation, Running, Downloading, Getting started
@section Installation

With a Lisp implementation that can be started from the command-line,
installation just requires a few lines in your @file{~/.emacs}:

@example
(setq inferior-lisp-program "@emph{the path to your Lisp system}")
(add-to-list 'load-path "@emph{the path of your @file{slime} directory}")
(require 'slime)
(slime-setup)
@end example

@iftex
The snippet above also appears in the @file{README} file. You can
copy&paste it from there, but remember to fill in the appropriate
path.
@end iftex

We recommend not loading the @acronym{ILISP} package into Emacs if you
intend to use @SLIME{}. Doing so will add a lot of extra bindings to
the keymap for Lisp source files that may be confusing and may not
work correctly for a Lisp process started by @SLIME{}.

@node Running,  , Installation, Getting started
@section Running SLIME

@SLIME{} is started with the Emacs command @kbd{M-x slime}. This uses
the @code{inferior-lisp} package to start a Lisp process, loads and
starts the Lisp-side server (known as ``Swank''), and establishes a
socket connection between Emacs and Lisp. Finally a @REPL{} buffer is
created where you can enter Lisp expressions for evaluation.

At this point @SLIME{} is up and running and you can start exploring.

@node slime-mode, REPL, Getting started, Top
@chapter @code{slime-mode}

@SLIME{}'s commands are provided via @code{slime-mode}, a minor-mode
used in conjunction with Emacs's @code{lisp-mode}. This chapter
describes the @code{slime-mode} and its relatives.

@menu
* User-interface conventions::  
* Commands::                    
* Semantic indentation::        
* Reader conditionals::         
@end menu

@node User-interface conventions, Commands, slime-mode, slime-mode
@section User-interface conventions

To use @SLIME{} comfortably it is important to understand a few
``global'' user-interface characteristics. The most important
principles are described in this section.

@menu
* Temporary buffers::           
* Key bindings::                
* inferior-lisp::               
* Multithreading::              
@end menu

@node Temporary buffers, Key bindings, User-interface conventions, User-interface conventions
@subsection Temporary buffers

Some @SLIME{} commands create temporary buffers to display their
results. Although these buffers usually have their own special-purpose
major-modes, certain conventions are observed throughout.

Temporary buffers can be dismissed by pressing @kbd{q}. This kills the
buffer and restores the window configuration as it was before the
buffer was displayed. Temporary buffers can also be killed with the
usual commands like @code{kill-buffer}, in which case the previous
window configuration won't be restored.

Pressing @kbd{RET} is supposed to ``do the most obvious useful
thing.'' For instance, in an apropos buffer this prints a full
description of the symbol at point, and in an @acronym{XREF} buffer it
displays the source code for the reference at point. This convention
is inherited from Emacs's own buffers for apropos listings,
compilation results, etc.

Temporary buffers containing Lisp symbols use @code{slime-mode} in
addition to any special mode of their own. This makes the usual
@SLIME{} commands available for describing symbols, looking up
function definitions, and so on.

@node Key bindings, inferior-lisp, Temporary buffers, User-interface conventions
@subsection Key bindings

In general we try to make our key bindings fit with the overall Emacs
style. We also have the following somewhat unusual convention of our
own: when entering a three-key sequence, the final key can be pressed
either with control or unmodified. For example, the
@code{slime-describe-symbol} command is bound to @kbd{C-c C-d d}, but
it also works to type @kbd{C-c C-d C-d}. We're simply binding both key
sequences because some people like to hold control for all three keys
and others don't, and with the two-key prefix we're not afraid of
running out of keys.

There is one exception to this rule, just to trip you up. We never
bind @kbd{C-h} anywhere in a key sequence, so @kbd{C-c C-d C-h}
doesn't do the same thing as @kbd{C-c C-d h}. This is because Emacs
has a builtin default so that typing a prefix followed by @kbd{C-h}
will display all bindings starting with that prefix, so @kbd{C-c C-d
C-h} will actually list the bindings for all documentation commands.
This feature is just a bit too useful to clobber!

@node inferior-lisp, Multithreading, Key bindings, User-interface conventions
@subsection @code{*inferior-lisp*} buffer

@SLIME{} internally uses the @code{inferior-lisp} package to start
Lisp processes. This has a few user-visible consequences, some good
and some not-so-terribly. To avoid confusion it is useful to
understand the interactions.

The buffer @code{*inferior-lisp*} contains the Lisp process's own
top-level. This direct access to Lisp is useful for troubleshooting,
and some degree of @SLIME{} integration is available using the
@code{inferior-slime-mode}. However, in normal use we recommend using
the fully-integrated @SLIME{} @REPL{} and ignoring the
@code{*inferior-lisp*} buffer.

An unfortunate property of @code{inferior-lisp} is it inserts some
commands of its own directly into the @code{lisp-mode} keymap, such
that they aren't easily disabled. This makes Lisp source buffers
slightly schizophrenic, having both @SLIME{} and @code{inferior-lisp}
commands bound to keys and operating independently.

@SLIME{} overrides most key bindings, so in practice you are unlikely
to accidentally use an @code{inferior-lisp} command. If you do find a
command that pops up the @code{*inferior-lisp*} buffer, that command
doesn't belong to @SLIME{}, and you should probably lookup our
equivalent.

@node Multithreading,  , inferior-lisp, User-interface conventions
@subsection Multithreading

If the Lisp system supports multithreading, SLIME spawns a new thread
for each request, e.g., @kbd{C-x C-e} creates a new thread to evaluate
the expression.  An exception to this rule are requests from the
@REPL{}: all commands entered in the @REPL{} buffer are evaluated in a
dedicated @REPL{} thread.

Some complications arise with multithreading and special variables.
Non-global special bindings are thread-local, e.g., changing the value
of a let bound special variable in one thread has no effect on the
binding of the variables with the same name in other threads.  This
makes it sometimes difficult to change the printer or reader behaviour
for new threads.  The variable
@code{swank:*default-worker-thread-bindings*} was introduced for such
situtuations: instead of modifying the global value of a variable, add a
binding the @code{swank:*default-worker-thread-bindings*}.  E.g., with
the following code, new threads will read floating point values as
doubles by default:

@example
(push '(*read-default-float-format* . double-float)
       swank:*default-worker-thread-bindings*).
@end example

@node Commands, Semantic indentation, User-interface conventions, slime-mode
@section Commands

@menu
* Compilation::                 
* Finding definitions::         
* Lisp Evaluation::             
* Documentation::               
* Programming Helpers::         
* Recovery::                    
* Cross-reference::             
* Inspector::                   
* Profiling::                   
@end menu

@node Compilation, Finding definitions, Commands, Commands
@subsection Compilation commands

@SLIME{} has fancy commands for compiling functions, files, and
packages. The fancy part is that notes and warnings offered by the
Lisp compiler are intercepted and annotated directly onto the
corresponding expressions in the Lisp source buffer. (Give it a try to
see what this means.)

@table @kbd

@kbditem{C-c C-k, slime-compile-and-load-file}
Compile and load the current buffer's source file.

@kbditem{C-c M-k, slime-compile-file}
Compile (but don't load) the current buffer's source file.

@kbditem{C-c C-c, slime-compile-defun}
Compile the top-level form at point.

@end table

The annotations are indicated as underlining on source forms. The
compiler message associated with an annotation can be read either by
placing the mouse over the text or with the selection commands below.

@table @kbd

@item M-n
@itemx M-p
@code{slime-next-note, slime-previous-note}@*
These commands move the point between compiler notes and display the new note.

@kbditem{C-c M-c, slime-remove-notes}
Remove all annotations from the buffer.

@end table

@node Finding definitions, Lisp Evaluation, Compilation, Commands
@subsection Finding definitions (``Meta-Point'').

The familiar @kbd{M-.} command is provided. For generic functions this
command finds all methods, and with some systems it does other fancy
things (like tracing structure accessors to their @code{DEFSTRUCT}
definition).

@table @kbd

@kbditem{M-., slime-edit-definition}
Go to the definition of the symbol at point.

@item M-,
@code{slime-pop-find-definition-stack}
Go back from a definition found with @kbd{M-.}. This gives multi-level
backtracking when @kbd{M-.} has been used several times.

@end table

@node Lisp Evaluation, Documentation, Finding definitions, Commands
@subsection Lisp Evaluation

These commands each evaluate a Lisp expression in a different way. By
default they show their results in a message, but a prefix argument
causes the results to be printed in the @REPL{} instead.

@table @kbd

@kbditem{C-M-x, slime-eval-defun}
Evaluate top-level form.

@kbditem{C-x C-e, slime-eval-last-expression}
Evaluate the expression before point.

@kbditem{C-c C-p, slime-pprint-eval-last-expression}
Evaluate the expression before point and pretty-print the result.

@kbditem{C-c C-r, slime-eval-region}
Evaluate the region.

@kbditem{C-c :, slime-interactive-eval}
Evaluate an expression read from the minibuffer.

@anchor{slime-scratch}
@item M-x slime-scratch
Create a @file{*slime-scratch*} buffer. In this
buffer you can enter Lisp expressions and evaluate them with
@kbd{C-j}, like in Emacs's @file{*scratch*} buffer.

@end table

If `C-M-x' or `C-x C-e' is given a numeric argument, it inserts the
value into the current buffer at point, rather than displaying it in the
echo area.

@node Documentation, Programming Helpers, Lisp Evaluation, Commands
@subsection Documentation

@SLIME{}'s online documentation commands follow the example of Emacs
Lisp. The commands all share the common prefix @kbd{C-c C-d} and allow
the final key to be modified or unmodified (@xref{Key bindings}.)

@table @kbd

@kbditem{C-c C-d d, slime-describe-symbol}
Describe the symbol at point.

@kbditem{C-c C-d a, slime-apropos}
Apropos search. Search Lisp symbol names for a substring match and
present their documentation strings. By default the external symbols
of all packages are searched. With a prefix argument you can choose a
specific package and whether to include unexported symbols.

@kbditem{C-c C-d z, slime-apropos-all}
Like @code{slime-apropos} but also includes internal symbols by default.

@kbditem{C-c C-d p, slime-apropos-package}
Show apropos results of all symbols in a package. This command is for
browsing a package at a high-level. With package-name completion it
also serves as a rudimentary Smalltalk-ish image-browser.

@kbditem{C-c C-d h, slime-hyperspec-lookup}
Lookup the symbol at point in the @cite{Common Lisp Hyperspec}. This
uses the familiar @file{hyperspec.el} to show the appropriate section
in a web browser. The Hyperspec is found either on the Web or in
@code{common-lisp-hyperspec-root}, and the browser is selected by
@code{browse-url-browser-function}.

@kbditem{C-c C-d ~, common-lisp-hyperspec-format}
Lookup a format character in the @cite{Common Lisp Hyperspec}.
@end table

@node Programming Helpers, Recovery, Documentation, Commands
@subsection Programming Helpers

@menu
* Completion::                  
* Macro Expansion::             
* Accessing Documentation::     
* Disassembly::                 
@end menu

@node Completion, Macro Expansion, Programming Helpers, Programming Helpers
@subsubsection Completion

@table @kbd
@kbditem{M-TAB, slime-complete-symbol}
Complete the symbol at point. Note that three styles of completion are
available in @SLIME{}, and the default differs from normal Emacs
completion. @xref{Emacs-side customization}.

@anchor{slime-fuzzy-complete-symbol}
@kbditem{C-c M-i, slime-fuzzy-complete-symbol}
Presents a list of likely completions to choose from for an
abbreviation at point.  This is a third completion method and it is
very different from the more traditional completion to which
@command{slime-complete-symbol} defaults.  It attempts to complete a
symbol all at once, instead of in pieces.  For example, ``mvb'' will
find ``@code{multiple-value-bind}'' and ``norm-df'' will find
``@code{least-positive-normalized-double-float}''.  This can also be
selected as the method of completion used for
@code{slime-complete-symbol}.

@kbditem{C-c C-s, slime-complete-form} 
Looks up and inserts into the current buffer the argument list for the
function at point, if there is one.  More generally, the command
completes an incomplete form with a template for the missing arguments.
There is special code for discovering extra keywords of generic
functions and for handling @code{make-instance} and
@code{defmethod}. Examples:

@example
(subseq "abc" <C-c C-s>
  --inserts--> start [end])
(find 17 <C-c C-s>
  --inserts--> sequence :from-end from-end :test test
               :test-not test-not :start start :end end 
               :key key)
(find 17 '(17 18 19) :test #'= <C-c C-s>
  --inserts--> :from-end from-end
               :test-not test-not :start start :end end 
               :key key)
(defclass foo () ((bar :initarg :bar)))
(defmethod print-object <C-c C-s>
  --inserts-->   (object stream)
               body...)
(defmethod initialize-instance :after ((object foo) &key blub))
(make-instance 'foo <C-c C-s>
  --inserts--> :bar bar :blub blub initargs...)
@end example
@end table

@node Macro Expansion, Accessing Documentation, Completion, Programming Helpers
@subsubsection Macro Expansion

@xref{slime-macroexpansion-minor-mode}.

@table @kbd
@kbditem{C-c C-m, slime-macroexpand-1}
Macroexpand the expression at point once.  If invoked with a prefix
argument, use macroexpand instead of macroexpand-1.

@kbditem{C-c M-m, slime-macroexpand-all}
Fully macroexpand the expression at point.

@kbditem{C-c C-t, slime-toggle-trace-fdefinition}
Toggle tracing of the function at point.  If invoked with a prefix
argument, read additional information, like which particular method
should be traced.
@end table

@node Accessing Documentation, Disassembly, Macro Expansion, Programming Helpers
@subsubsection Accessing Documentation

@table @kbd
@kbditem{SPC, slime-space}
The space key inserts a space and also looks up and displays the
argument list for the function at point, if there is one.
@end table

@node Disassembly,  , Accessing Documentation, Programming Helpers
@subsubsection Disassembly

@table @kbd
@kbditem{C-c M-d, slime-disassemble-symbol}
Disassemble the function definition of the symbol at point.
@end table

@node Recovery, Cross-reference, Programming Helpers, Commands
@subsection Abort/Recovery

@table @kbd

@kbditem{C-c C-b, slime-interrupt}
Interrupt Lisp (send @code{SIGINT}).

@kbditem{C-c ~, slime-sync-package-and-default-directory}
Synchronize the current package and working directory from Emacs to
Lisp.

@kbditem{C-c M-p, slime-repl-set-package}
Set the current package of the @acronym{REPL}.

@end table

@node Cross-reference, Inspector, Recovery, Commands
@subsection Cross-reference

@SLIME{}'s cross-reference commands are based on the support provided
by the Lisp system, which varies widely between Lisps. For systems
with no builtin @acronym{XREF} support @SLIME{} queries a portable
@acronym{XREF} package, which is taken from the @cite{CMU AI
Repository} and bundled with @SLIME{}.

Each command operates on the symbol at point, or prompts if there is
none. With a prefix argument they always prompt. You can either enter
the key bindings as shown here or with the control modified on the
last key, @xref{Key bindings}.

@table @kbd

@kbditem{C-c C-w c, slime-who-calls}
Show function callers.

@kbditem{C-c C-w r, slime-who-references}
Show references to global variable.

@kbditem{C-c C-w b, slime-who-binds}
Show bindings of a global variable.

@kbditem{C-c C-w s, slime-who-sets}
Show assignments to a global variable.

@kbditem{C-c C-w m, slime-who-macroexpands}
Show expansions of a macro.

@item M-x slime-who-specializes
Show all known methods specialized on a class.

@end table

There are also ``List callers/callees'' commands. These operate by
rummaging through function objects on the heap at a low-level to
discover the call graph. They are only available with some Lisp
systems, and are most useful as a fallback when precise @acronym{XREF}
information is unavailable.

@table @kbd
@kbditem{C-c <, slime-list-callers}
List callers of a function.
@kbditem{C-c >, slime-list-callees}
List callees of a function.
@end table

@node Inspector, Profiling, Cross-reference, Commands
@subsection Inspector

The @SLIME{} inspector is a very fancy Emacs-based alternative to the
standard @code{INSPECT} function. The inspector presents objects in
Emacs buffers using a combination of plain text, hyperlinks to related
objects, and ``actions'' that can be selected to invoke Lisp code on
the inspected object. For example, to present a generic function the
inspector shows the documentation in plain text and presents each
method with both a hyperlink to inspect the method object and a
``remove method'' action that you can invoke interactively.

The inspector can easily be specialized for the objects in your own
programs. For details see the the @code{inspect-for-emacs} generic
function in @file{swank-backend.lisp}.

@table @kbd
@kbditem{C-c I, slime-inspect}
Inspect the value of an expression entered in the minibuffer.
@end table

The standard commands available in the inspector are:

@table @kbd

@kbditem{RET, slime-inspector-operate-on-point} 
If point is on a value then recursivly call the inspcetor on that
value. If point is on an action then call that action.

@kbditem{d, slime-inspector-describe}
Describe the slot at point.

@kbditem{l, slime-inspector-pop}
Go back to the previous object (return from @kbd{RET}).

@kbditem{n, slime-inspector-next}
The inverse of @kbd{l}. Also bound to @kbd{SPC}.

@kbditem{q, slime-inspector-quit}
Dismiss the inspector buffer.

@kbditem{M-RET, slime-inspector-copy-down} Evaluate the value under
point via the REPL (to set `*').

@end table

@node Profiling,  , Inspector, Commands
@subsection Profiling

@table @kbd
@item M-x slime-toggle-profile-fdefinition
Toggle profiling of a function.
@item M-x slime-profile-package
Profile all functions in a package.
@item M-x slime-unprofile-all
Unprofile all functions.
@item M-x slime-profile-report
Report profiler data.
@item M-x slime-profile-reset
Reset profiler data.
@end table

@node Semantic indentation, Reader conditionals, Commands, slime-mode
@section Semantic indentation

@SLIME{} automatically discovers how to indent the macros in your Lisp
system. To do this the Lisp side scans all the macros in the system and
reports to Emacs all the ones with @code{&body} arguments. Emacs then
indents these specially, putting the first arguments four spaces in and
the ``body'' arguments just two spaces, as usual.

This should ``just work.'' If you are a lucky sort of person you needn't
read the rest of this section.

To simplify the implementation, @SLIME{} doesn't distinguish between
macros with the same symbol-name but different packages. This makes it
fit nicely with Emacs's indentation code. However, if you do have
several macros with the same symbol-name then they will all be indented
the same way, arbitrarily using the style from one of their
arglists. You can find out which symbols are involved in collisions
with:

@example
(swank:print-indentation-lossage)
@end example

If a collision causes you irritation, don't have a nervous breakdown,
just override the Elisp symbol's @code{common-lisp-indent-function}
property to your taste. @SLIME{} won't override your custom settings, it
just tries to give you good defaults.

A more subtle issue is that imperfect caching is used for the sake of
performance. @footnote{@emph{Of course} we made sure it was actually too
slow before making the ugly optimization.}
@c
In an ideal world, Lisp would automatically scan every symbol for
indentation changes after each command from Emacs. However, this is too
expensive to do every time. Instead Lisp usually just scans the symbols
whose home package matches the one used by the Emacs buffer where the
request comes from. That is sufficient to pick up the indentation of
most interactively-defined macros. To catch the rest we make a full scan
of every symbol each time a new Lisp package is created between commands
-- that takes care of things like new systems being loaded.

You can use @kbd{M-x slime-update-indentation} to force all symbols to
be scanned for indentation information.

@node Reader conditionals,  , Semantic indentation, slime-mode
@section Reader conditional fontification

@SLIME{} automatically evaluates reader-conditional expressions in
source buffers and ``grays out'' code that will be skipped for the
current Lisp connection.

@node REPL, Debugger, slime-mode, Top
@chapter REPL: the ``top level''

@SLIME{} uses a custom Read-Eval-Print Loop (@REPL{}, also known as a
``top level''). The @REPL{} user-interface is written in Emacs Lisp,
which gives more Emacs-integration than the traditional
@code{comint}-based Lisp interaction:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Conditions signalled in @REPL{} expressions are debugged with @SLDB{}.
@item
Return values are distinguished from printed output by separate Emacs
faces (colours).
@item
Emacs manages the @REPL{} prompt with markers. This ensures that Lisp
output is inserted in the right place, and doesn't get mixed up with
user input.
@end itemize

@menu
* REPL commands::               
* Input Navigation::            
* Shortcuts::                   
@end menu

@node REPL commands, Input Navigation, REPL, REPL
@section REPL commands

@table @kbd

@kbditem{RET, slime-repl-return}
Evaluate the current input in Lisp if it is complete. If incomplete,
open a new line and indent. If a prefix argument is given then the
input is evaluated without checking for completeness.

@kbditem{C-RET, slime-repl-closing-return}
Close any unmatched parenthesis and then evaluate the current input in
Lisp. Also bound to @kbd{M-RET}.

@kbditem{C-j, slime-repl-newline-and-indent}
Open and indent a new line.

@kbditem{C-c C-c, slime-interrupt}
Interrupt the Lisp process with @code{SIGINT}.

@kbditem{TAB, slime-complete-symbol}
Complete the symbol at point.

@kbditem{C-c C-o, slime-repl-clear-output}
Remove the output and result of the previous expression from the
buffer.

@kbditem{C-c C-t, slime-repl-clear-buffer}
Clear the entire buffer, leaving only a prompt.

@end table

@node Input Navigation, Shortcuts, REPL commands, REPL
@section Input navigation

@table @kbd

@kbditem{C-a, slime-repl-bol}
Go to the beginning of the line, but stop at the @REPL{} prompt.

@item M-n
@itemx M-p
@itemx M-s
@itemx M-r
@code{slime-repl-@{next,previous@}-input}@*
@code{slime-repl-@{next,previous@}-matching-input}@*
@code{comint}-style input history commands.

@item C-c C-n
@itemx C-c C-p
@code{slime-repl-next-prompt, slime-repl-previous-prompt}@*
Move between the current and previous prompts in the @REPL{} buffer.

@item C-M-a
@itemx C-M-e
@code{slime-repl-beginning-of-defun, slime-repl-end-of-defun}
These commands are like @code{beginning-of-defun} and
@code{end-of-defun}, but when used inside the @REPL{} input area they
instead go directly to the beginning or the end, respectively.

@end table

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Shortcuts,  , Input Navigation, REPL
@section Shortcuts

``Shortcuts'' are a special set of @REPL{} commands that are invoked
by name. To invoke a shortcut you first press @kbd{,} (comma) at the
@REPL{} prompt and then enter the shortcut's name when prompted.

Shortcuts deal with things like switching between directories and
compiling and loading Lisp systems. The exact set of shortcuts is not
currently documented in this manual, but you can use the @code{help}
shortcut to list them interactively.

@node Debugger, Extras, REPL, Top
@chapter SLDB: the SLIME debugger

@SLIME{} has a custom Emacs-based debugger called @SLDB{}. Conditions
signalled in the Lisp system invoke @SLDB{} in Emacs by way of the
Lisp @code{*DEBUGGER-HOOK*}.

@SLDB{} pops up a buffer when a condition is signalled. The buffer
displays a description of the condition, a list of restarts, and a
backtrace. Commands are offered for invoking restarts, examining the
backtrace, and poking around in stack frames.

@menu
* Examining frames::            
* Restarts::                    
* Frame Navigation::            
* Miscellaneous::               
@end menu

@node Examining frames, Restarts, Debugger, Debugger
@section Examining frames

Commands for examining the stack frame at point.

@table @kbd

@kbditem{t, sldb-toggle-details}
Toggle display of local variables and @code{CATCH} tags.

@kbditem{v, sldb-show-source}
View the frame's current source expression. The expression is
presented in the Lisp source file's buffer.

@kbditem{e, sldb-eval-in-frame}
Evaluate an expression in the frame. The expression can refer to the
available local variables in the frame.

@kbditem{d, sldb-pprint-eval-in-frame}
Evaluate an expression in the frame and pretty-print the result in a
temporary buffer.

@kbditem{D, sldb-disassemble}
Disassemble the frame's function. Includes information such as the
instruction pointer within the frame.

@kbditem{i, sldb-inspect-in-frame}
Inspect the result of evaluating an expression in the frame.

@end table

@node Restarts, Frame Navigation, Examining frames, Debugger
@section Invoking restarts

@table @kbd

@kbditem{a, sldb-abort}
Invoke the @code{ABORT} restart.

@kbditem{q, sldb-quit}
``Quit'' -- @code{THROW} to a tag that the top-level @SLIME{}
request-loop catches.

@kbditem{c, sldb-continue}
Invoke the @code{CONTINUE} restart.

@item 0 ... 9
Invoke a restart by number.

@end table

Restarts can also be invoked by pressing @kbd{RET} or @kbd{Mouse-2} on
them in the buffer.

@node Frame Navigation, Miscellaneous, Restarts, Debugger
@section Navigating between frames

@table @kbd

@item n
@item p
@code{sldb-down, sldb-up}@*
Move between frames.

@item M-n
@item M-p
@code{sldb-details-@{down,up@}}@*
Move between frames ``with sugar'': hide the details of the original
frame and display the details and source code of the next. Sugared
motion makes you see the details and source code for the current frame
only.

@end table

@node Miscellaneous,  , Frame Navigation, Debugger
@section Miscellaneous Commands

@table @kbd

@kbditem{r, sldb-restart-frame}
Restart execution of the frame with the same arguments it was
originally called with. (This command is not available in all
implementations.)

@kbditem{R, sldb-return-from-frame}
Return from the frame with a value entered in the minibuffer. (This
command is not available in all implementations.)

@kbditem{s, sldb-step}
Step to the next expression in the frame. (This command is not
available in all implementations.)

@kbditem{B, sldb-break-with-default-debugger}
Exit @SLDB{} and debug the condition using the Lisp system's default
debugger.

@kbditem{:, slime-interactive-eval}
Evaluate an expression entered in the minibuffer.

@end table

@node Extras, Customization, Debugger, Top
@chapter Extras

@menu
* slime-selector::              
* slime-autodoc-mode::          
* slime-macroexpansion-minor-mode::  
* Multiple connections::        
* Typeout frames::              
@end menu

@node slime-selector, slime-autodoc-mode, Extras, Extras
@section @code{slime-selector}

The @code{slime-selector} command is for quickly switching to
important buffers: the @REPL{}, @SLDB{}, the Lisp source you were just
hacking, etc. Once invoked the command prompts for a single letter to
specify which buffer it should display. Here are some of the options:

@table @kbd
@item ?
A help buffer listing all @code{slime-selectors}'s available buffers.
@item r
The @REPL{} buffer for the current @SLIME{} connection.
@item d
The most recently activated @SLDB{} buffer for the current connection.
@item l
The most recently visited @code{lisp-mode} source buffer.
@item s
The @code{*slime-scratch*} buffer. @xref{slime-scratch}.
@end table

@code{slime-selector} doesn't have a key binding by default but we
suggest that you assign it a global one. You can bind @kbd{C-c s} like
this:

@example
(global-set-key "\C-cs" 'slime-selector)
@end example

And then you can switch to the @REPL{} from anywhere with @kbd{C-c s
r}.

The macro @code{def-slime-selector-method} can be used to define new
buffers for @code{slime-selector} to find.

@node slime-autodoc-mode, slime-macroexpansion-minor-mode, slime-selector, Extras
@section @code{slime-autodoc-mode}

@code{slime-autodoc-mode} is an additional minor-mode for
automatically showing information about symbols near the point. For
function names the argument list is displayed and for global variables
we show the value. This is a clone of @code{eldoc-mode} for Emacs
Lisp.

The mode can be enabled in the @code{slime-setup} call of your
@code{~/.emacs}:

@example
(slime-setup :autodoc t)
@end example

@node slime-macroexpansion-minor-mode, Multiple connections, slime-autodoc-mode, Extras
@section slime-macroexpansion-minor-mode

Within a slime macroexpansion buffer some extra commands are provided
(these commands are always available but are only bound to keys in a
macroexpansion buffer).

@table @kbd
@kbditem{C-c C-m, slime-macroexpand-1-inplace}
Just like slime-macroexpand-1 but the original form is replaced with the expansion.

@kbditem{g, slime-macroexpand-1-inplace}
The last macroexpansion is performed again, the current contents of
the macroexpansion buffer are replaced with the new expansion.

@kbditem{q, slime-temp-buffer-quit}
Close the expansion buffer.
@end table

@node Multiple connections, Typeout frames, slime-macroexpansion-minor-mode, Extras
@section Multiple connections

@SLIME{} is able to connect to multiple Lisp processes at the same
time. The @kbd{M-x slime} command, when invoked with a prefix
argument, will offer to create an additional Lisp process if one is
already running. This is often convenient, but it requires some
understanding to make sure that your @SLIME{} commands execute in the
Lisp that you expect them to.

Some buffers are tied to specific Lisp processes. Each Lisp connection
has its own @acronym{REPL} buffer, and all expressions entered or
@SLIME{} commands invoked in that buffer are sent to the associated
connection. Other buffers created by @SLIME{} are similarly tied to
the connections they originate from, including @SLDB{} buffers,
apropos result listings, and so on. These buffers are the result of
some interaction with a Lisp process, so commands in them always go
back to that same process.

Commands executed in other places, such as @code{slime-mode} source
buffers, always use the ``default'' connection. Usually this is the
most recently established connection, but this can be reassigned via
the ``connection list'' buffer:

@table @kbd
@kbditem{C-c C-x c, slime-list-connections}
Pop up a buffer listing the established connections.
@end table

The buffer displayed by @code{slime-list-connections} gives a one-line
summary of each connection. The summary shows the connection's serial
number, the name of the Lisp implementation, and other details of the
Lisp process. The current ``default'' connection is indicated with an
asterisk.

The commands available in the connection-list buffer are:

@table @kbd

@kbditem{RET, slime-goto-connection}
Pop to the @acronym{REPL} buffer of the connection at point.

@kbditem{d, slime-connection-list-make-default}
Make the connection at point the ``default'' connection. It will then
be used for commands in @code{slime-mode} source buffers.

@kbditem{g, slime-update-connection-list}
Update the connection list in the buffer.

@kbditem{q, slime-temp-buffer-quit}
Quit the connection list (kill buffer, restore window configuration).

@end table

@node Typeout frames,  , Multiple connections, Extras
@section Typeout frames

A ``typeout frame'' is a special Emacs frame which is used instead of
the echo area (minibuffer) to display messages from @SLIME{} commands.
This is an optional feature. The advantage of a typeout frame over the
echo area is that it can hold more text, it can be scrolled, and its
contents don't disappear when you press a key. All potentially long
messages are sent to the typeout frame, such as argument lists, macro
expansions, and so on.

@table @kbd
@item M-x slime-ensure-typeout-frame
Ensure that a typeout frame exists, creating one if necessary.
@end table

If the typeout frame is closed then the echo area will be used again
as usual.

To have a typeout frame created automatically at startup you can use
the @code{slime-connected-hook}:

@example
(add-hook 'slime-connected-hook 'slime-ensure-typeout-frame)
@end example

@node Customization, Tips and Tricks, Extras, Top
@chapter Customization

@menu
* Emacs-side customization::    
* Lisp-side::                   
@end menu

@node Emacs-side customization, Lisp-side, Customization, Customization
@section Emacs-side

The Emacs part of @SLIME{} can be configured with the Emacs
@code{customize} system, just use @kbd{M-x customize-group slime
RET}. Because the customize system is self-describing, we only cover a
few important or obscure configuration options here in the manual.

@table @code

@item slime-truncate-lines
The value to use for @code{truncate-lines} in line-by-line summary
buffers popped up by @SLIME{}. This is @code{t} by default, which
ensures that lines do not wrap in backtraces, apropos listings, and so
on. It can however cause information to spill off the screen.

@item slime-multiprocessing
This should be set to @code{t} if you want to use multiprocessing
(threads) in your Lisp system. It causes any necessary initialization
to be performed during Lisp server startup.

@item slime-complete-symbol-function
The function to use for completion of Lisp symbols. Three completion
styles are available. The default @code{slime-complete-symbol*}
performs completion ``in parallel'' over the hyphen-delimited
sub-words of a symbol name.
@footnote{This style of completion is modelled on @file{completer.el}
by Chris McConnell. That package is bundled with @acronym{ILISP}.}
Formally this means that ``@code{a-b-c}'' can complete to any symbol
matching the regular expression ``@code{^a.*-b.*-c.*}'' (where ``dot''
matches anything but a hyphen). Examples give a more intuitive
feeling:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{m-v-b} completes to @code{multiple-value-bind}.
@item
@code{w-open} is ambiguous: it completes to either
@code{with-open-file} or @code{with-open-stream}. The symbol is
expanded to the longest common completion (@code{with-open-}) and the
point is placed at the first point of ambiguity, which in this case is
the end.
@item
@code{w--stream} completes to @code{with-open-stream}.
@end itemize
An alternative is @code{slime-simple-complete-symbol}, which
completes in the usual Emacs way.  Finally, there is
@code{slime-fuzzy-complete-symbol}, which is quite different from both
of the above and tries to find best matches to an abbreviated symbol.
It also has its own keybinding, defaulting to @kbd{C-c M-i}.
@xref{slime-fuzzy-complete-symbol}, for more information.

@item slime-filename-translations
This variable controls filename translation between Emacs and the Lisp
system. It is useful if you run Emacs and Lisp on separate machines
which don't share a common file system or if they share the filessytem
but have different layouts, as is the case with @acronym{SMB}-based
file sharing.

@item slime-net-coding-system
If you want to transmit Unicode characters between Emacs and the Lisp
system, you should customize this variable.  E.g., if you use SBCL, you
can set:
@example
(setq slime-net-coding-system 'utf-8-unix)
@end example
To actually display Unicode characters you also need appropriate fonts,
otherwise the characters will be rendered as hollow boxes.  If you are
using Allegro CL and GNU Emacs, you can also use @code{emacs-mule-unix}
as coding system.  GNU Emacs has often nicer fonts for the latter
encoding.

@end table

@menu
* Hooks::                       
@end menu

@node Hooks,  , Emacs-side customization, Emacs-side customization
@subsection Hooks

@table @code

@item slime-mode-hook
This hook is run each time a buffer enters @code{slime-mode}. It is
most useful for setting buffer-local configuration in your Lisp source
buffers. An example use is to enable @code{slime-autodoc-mode}
(@xref{slime-autodoc-mode}.)

@item slime-connected-hook
This hook is run when @SLIME{} establishes a connection to a Lisp
server. An example use is to create a Typeout frame (@xref{Typeout frames}.)

@item sldb-hook
This hook is run after @SLDB{} is invoked. The hook functions are
called from the @SLDB{} buffer after it is initialized. An example use
is to add @code{sldb-print-condition} to this hook, which makes all
conditions debugged with @SLDB{} be recorded in the @REPL{} buffer.

@end table

@node Lisp-side,  , Emacs-side customization, Customization
@section Lisp-side (Swank)

The Lisp server side of @SLIME{} (known as ``Swank'') offers several
variables to configure. The initialization file @file{~/.swank.lisp}
is automatically evaluated at startup and can be used to set these
variables.

@menu
* Communication style::         
* Other configurables::         
@end menu

@node Communication style, Other configurables, Lisp-side, Lisp-side
@subsection Communication style

The most important configurable is @code{SWANK:*COMMUNICATION-STYLE*},
which specifies the mechanism by which Lisp reads and processes
protocol messages from Emacs. The choice of communication style has a
global influence on @SLIME{}'s operation.

The available communication styles are:

@table @code
@item NIL
This style simply loops reading input from the communication socket
and serves @SLIME{} protocol events as they arise. The simplicity
means that the Lisp cannot do any other processing while under
@SLIME{}'s control.

@item :FD-HANDLER
This style uses the classical Unix-style ``@code{select()}-loop.''
Swank registers the communication socket with an event-dispatching
framework (such as @code{SERVE-EVENT} in @acronym{CMUCL} and
@acronym{SBCL}) and receives a callback when data is available. In
this style requests from Emacs are only detected and processed when
Lisp enters the event-loop. This style is simple and predictable.

@item :SIGIO
This style uses @dfn{signal-driven I/O} with a @code{SIGIO} signal
handler. Lisp receives requests from Emacs along with a signal,
causing it to interrupt whatever it is doing to serve the
request. This style has the advantage of responsiveness, since Emacs
can perform operations in Lisp even while it is busy doing other
things. It also allows Emacs to issue requests concurrently, e.g. to
send one long-running request (like compilation) and then interrupt
that with several short requests before it completes. The
disadvantages are that it may conflict with other uses of @code{SIGIO}
by Lisp code, and it may cause untold havoc by interrupting Lisp at an
awkward moment.

@item :SPAWN
This style uses multiprocessing support in the Lisp system to execute
each request in a separate thread. This style has similar properties
to @code{:SIGIO}, but it does not use signals and all requests issued
by Emacs can be executed in parallel.

@end table

The default request handling style is chosen according to the
capabilities your Lisp system. The general order of preference is
@code{:SPAWN}, then @code{:SIGIO}, then @code{:FD-HANDLER}, with
@code{NIL} as a last resort. You can check the default style by
calling @code{SWANK-BACKEND:PREFERRED-COMMUNICATION-STYLE}. You can
also override the default by setting
@code{SWANK:*COMMUNICATION-STYLE*} in your Swank init file.

@node Other configurables,  , Communication style, Lisp-side
@subsection Other configurables

These Lisp variables can be configured via your @file{~/.swank.lisp}
file:

@table @code

@item SWANK:*CONFIGURE-EMACS-INDENTATION*
This variable controls whether indentation styles for
@code{&body}-arguments in macros are discovered and sent to Emacs. It
is enabled by default.

@item SWANK:*GLOBALLY-REDIRECT-IO*
When true this causes the standard streams (@code{*standard-output*},
etc) to be globally redirected to the @REPL{} in Emacs. When
@code{NIL} (the default) these streams are only temporarily redirected
to Emacs using dynamic bindings while handling requests. Note that
@code{*standard-input*} is currently never globally redirected into
Emacs, because it can interact badly with the Lisp's native @REPL{} by
having it try to read from the Emacs one.

@item SWANK:*GLOBAL-DEBUGGER*
When true (the default) this causes @code{*DEBUGGER-HOOK*} to be
globally set to @code{SWANK:SWANK-DEBUGGER-HOOK} and thus for @SLIME{}
to handle all debugging in the Lisp image. This is for debugging
multithreaded and callback-driven applications.

@item SWANK:*SLDB-PRINTER-BINDINGS*
@itemx SWANK:*MACROEXPAND-PRINTER-BINDINGS*
@itemx SWANK:*SWANK-PPRINT-BINDINGS*
These variables can be used to customize the printer in various
situations.  The values of the variables are association lists of
printer variable names with the corresponding value.  E.g., to enable
the pretty printer for formatting backtraces in @SLDB{}, you can use:
@example
(push '(*print-pretty* . t) swank:*sldb-printer-bindings*).
@end example

@item SWANK:*USE-DEDICATED-OUTPUT-STREAM*
This variable controls an optimization for sending printed output from
Lisp to Emacs. When @code{t} a separate socket is established solely for
Lisp to send printed output to Emacs through. Without the optimization
it is necessary to send output in protocol-messages to Emacs which must
then be decoded, and this doesn't always keep up if Lisp starts
``spewing'' copious output.

@item SWANK:*DEDICATED-OUTPUT-STREAM-PORT*
When @code{*USE-DEDICATED-OUTPUT-STREAM*} is @code{t} the stream will
be opened on this port. The default value, @code{0}, means that the
stream will be opened on some random port.

@item SWANK:*LOG-EVENTS*
Setting this variable to @code{t} causes all protocol messages
exchanged with Emacs to be printed to @code{*TERMINAL-IO*}. This is
useful for low-level debugging and for observing how @SLIME{} works
``on the wire.'' The output of @code{*TERMINAL-IO*} can be found in
your Lisp system's own listener, usually in the buffer
@code{*inferior-lisp*}.

@end table

@node Tips and Tricks, Credits, Customization, Top
@chapter Tips and Tricks

@menu
* Connecting to a remote lisp::  
* Global IO Redirection::       
* Auto-SLIME::                  
@end menu

@node Connecting to a remote lisp
@section Connecting to a remote lisp

One of the advantages to the way @SLIME{} is implemented is that we
can easily run the Emacs side (slime.el) on one machine and the lisp
backend (swank) on another. The basic idea is to start up lisp on the
remote machine, load swank and wait for incoming slime connections. On
the local machine we start up emacs and tell slime to connect to the
remote machine. The details are a bit messier but the underlying idea
is that simple.

@menu
* Setting up the lisp image::   
* Setting up Emacs::            
* Setting up pathname translations::  
@end menu

@node Setting up the lisp image
@subsection Setting up the lisp image


When you want to load swank without gonig through the normal, Emacs
based, process just load the @file{swank-loader.lisp} file. Just
execute

@example
(load "/path/to/swank-loader.lisp")
@end example

inside a running lisp image@footnote{@SLIME{} also provides an
@acronym{ASDF} system definiton which does the same thing}. Now all we
need to do is startup our swank server. This example assumes we're
using the default settings, if you need to do anything particular
(like be able to reconnect to swank after you're done, look into
@code{swank:create-server}'s other arguments).

@example
(swank:create-server)
@end example

Since we're going to be tunneling our connection via
ssh@footnote{there is a way to connect without an ssh tunnel, but it
has the side-effect of giving the entire world access to your lisp
image, se we're not gonig to talk about it} and we'll only have on
port open we want to tell swank to not use an extra connection for
output:

@example
(setf swank:*use-dedicated-output-stream* nil)
@end example

@node Setting up Emacs
@subsection Setting up Emacs

Now we need to create the tunnel between the local machine and the
remote machine.

@example
ssh -L4005:127.0.0.1:4005 username@@remote.example.com
@end example

That ssh invocation creates an ssh tunnel between the port 4005 on our
local machine and the port 4005 on the remote machine@footnote{By
default swank listens for incoming connections on port 4005, had we
passed a @code{:port} parameter to @code{swank:create-server} we'd be
using that port number instead}. 

Finally we can start @SLIME{}:

@example
M-x slime-connect RET RET
@end example

The @kbd{RET RET} sequence just means that we want to use the default
host (@code{127.0.0.1}) and the default port (@code{4005}). Even
though we're connecting to a remote machine the ssh tunnel fools Emacs
into thinking it's actually @code{127.0.0.1}.

@node Setting up pathname translations
@subsection Setting up pathname translations

One of the main problems with running swank remotely is that Emacs
assumes the files can be found using normal filenames. if we want
things like @code{slime-compile-and-load-file} (@kbd{C-c C-k}) and
@code{slime-edit-definition} (@kbd{M-.}) to work correctly we need to
find a way to let our local Emacs refer to remote files.

There are, mainly, two ways to do this. The first is to mount, using
NFS or similar, the remote machine's hard disk on the local machine's
file system in such a fashion that a filename like
@file{/opt/project/source.lisp} refers to the same file on both
machines. Unfortunetly NFS is usually slow, often buggy, and not
always feasable, fortunetely we have an ssh connection and Emacs'
@code{tramp-mode} can do the rest.

What we do is teach Emacs how to take a filename on the remote machine
and translate it into something that tramp can understand and access
(and vice-versa). Assuming the remote machine's host name is
@code{remote.example.com}, @code{cl:machine-instance} returns
``remote'' and we login as the user ``user'' we can use @SLIME{}'s
built-in mechanism to setup the proper transaltions by simply doing:

@example
(push (slime-create-filename-translator :machine-instance "remote.example.com"
                                        :remote-host "remote"
                                        :username "user")
      slime-filename-translations)
@end example

@node Global IO Redirection
@section Globally redirecting all IO to the REPL

By default @SLIME{} does not change @code{*standard-output*} and
friends outside of the @REPL{}. If you have any other threads which
call @code{format}, @code{write-string}, etc. that output will be seen
only in the @code{*inferior-lisp*} buffer or on the terminal, more
often than not this inconvenient. So, if you want code such as this:

@example
(run-in-new-thread
  (lambda ()
    (write-line "In some random thread.~%" *standard-output*)))
@end example

to send its output to @SLIME{}'s repl buffer, as opposed to
@code{*inferior-lisp*}, set @code{swank:*globally-redirect-io*} to T.

Note that the value of this variable is only checked when swank
accepts the connection so you should set it via
@file{~/.swank.lisp}. Otherwise you will need to call
@code{swank::globally-redirect-io-to-connection} yourself, but you
shouldn't do that unless you know what you're doing.

@node Auto-SLIME
@section Connecting to SLIME automatically

To making @SLIME{} connect to your lisp whenever you open a lisp file
just add this to your @file{.emacs}:

@example
(add-hook 'slime-mode-hook
          (lambda ()
            (unless (slime-connected-p)
              (save-excursion (slime)))))
@end example

@node Credits,  , Tips and Tricks, Top
@chapter Credits

@emph{The soppy ending...}

@unnumberedsec Hackers of the good hack

@SLIME{} is an Extension of @acronym{SLIM} by Eric Marsden. At the
time of writing, the authors and code-contributors of @SLIME{} are:

@include contributors.texi

... not counting the bundled code from @file{hyperspec.el},
@cite{CLOCC}, and the @cite{CMU AI Repository}.

Many people on the @code{slime-devel} mailing list have made non-code
contributions to @SLIME{}. Life is hard though: you gotta send code to
get your name in the manual. @code{:-)}

@unnumberedsec Thanks!

We're indebted to the good people of @code{common-lisp.net} for their
hosting and help, and for rescuing us from ``Sourceforge hell.''

Implementors of the Lisps that we support have been a great help. We'd
like to thank the @acronym{CMUCL} maintainers for their helpful
answers, Craig Norvell and Kevin Layer at Franz providing Allegro CL
licenses for @SLIME{} development, and Peter Graves for his help to
get @SLIME{} running with @acronym{ABCL}.

Most of all we're happy to be working with the Lisp implementors
who've joined in the @SLIME{} development: Dan Barlow and Christophe
Rhodes of @acronym{SBCL}, Gary Byers of OpenMCL, and Martin Simmons of
LispWorks. Thanks also to Alain Picard and Memetrics for funding
Martin's initial work on the LispWorks backend!

@bye
