@ignore
@node Glossary
@chapter Glossary
@c This 'ignore' section fools texinfo-all-menus-update into creating
@c proper menus for this chapter.
@end ignore

@table @keyword
@item BNF
In semantic 1.4, a BNF file represented ``Bovine Normal Form'', the
grammar file used for the 1.4 parser generator.  This was a play on
Backus-Naur Form which proved too confusing.

@item bovinate
A verb representing what happens when a bovine parser parsers a file.

@item bovine lambda
In a bovine, or LL parser, the bovine lambda is a function to execute
when a specific set of match rules has succeeded in matches text from
the buffer.

@item bovine parser
A parser using the bovine parser generator.  It is an LL parser
suitible for small simple languages.

@item context

@item LALR

@item lexer
A program which converts text into a stream of tokens by analyzing
them lexially.  Lexers will commonly create strings, symbols,
keywords and punctuation, and strip whitespace and comments.

@item LL

@item nonterminal

@item overloadable
Some functions are defined via @code{define-overload}.
These can be overloaded via ....

@item parser
A program that converts @b{tokens} to @b{tags}.

@item tag
A tag is a representation of some entity in a language file, such as a
functin, variable, or include statement.  In semantic, the word tag is
used the same way it is used for the etags or ctags tools.

@item token
A single atomic item returned from a lexer.  It represents some set
of characters found in a buffer.

@item token stream
The output of the lexer as well as the input to the parser.

@item wisent parser
A parser using the wisent parser generator.  It is a port of bison to
Emacs Lisp.  It is an LALR parser suitable for complex languages.

@end table
