@ignore
@node Semantic Minor Modes
@chapter Semantic Minor Modes
@end ignore

Semantic comes with a wide range of minor-modes which use various
features of semantic.  These modes vary widely in utility.

There are some core modes that are required for smooth operations.
Some of these are discussed in other chapters, such as @ref{Idle
Scheduler}, and @ref{semanticdb}

@menu
* Code Helpers::        Modes for assisting in authoring code.
* Development Modes::   Modes for assisting in developing/debugging Semantic.
@end menu

@node Code Helpers
@section Code Helpers

Code Helpers are minor modes that augment basic Emacs behavior in ways
that can assist in programming Semantic supported langauges.

@menu
* Sticky Function Mode::
* Highlight Func Mode::	
* Tag Decoration Mode::
* MRU Bookmarks Mode::
@end menu

Senator is another mode which can assist in programming @ref{senator}.

@node Development Modes
@section Development Modes

@menu
* Highlight Edits Mode::
* Parser State::
* Unmatched Syntax Highlighting::
@end menu

@node Sticky Function Mode
@subsection Sticky Function Headers

@deffn Command semantic-stickyfunc-mode &optional arg
Minor mode to show the title of a tag in the header line.
Enables/disables making the header line of functions sticky.
A function (or other tag class specified by
@code{semantic-stickyfunc-sticky-classes}) has a header line, meaning the
first line which describes the rest of the construct.  This first
line is what is displayed in the Emacs @var{21} header line.

With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

@defvar semantic-stickyfunc-sticky-classes
List of tag classes which sticky func will display in the header line.
@end defvar

@node Highlight Func Mode
@subsection Highlight Func Mode
@cindex semantic-highlight-func-mode

Highlight Func mode will put a highlight overlay over the top
declaration line of the function or tag the point is in.  Enabling
this feature also puts a context menu onto the declaration line
providing easy access to some basic commands.

@defun semantic-highlight-func-mode &optional arg
@anchor{semantic-highlight-func-mode}
Minor mode to highlight the first line of the current tag.
Enables/disables making the header line of functions sticky.
A function (or other tag class specified by
@code{semantic-stickfunc-sticky-classes}) is highlighted, meaning the
first line which describes the rest of the construct.

See @code{semantic-stickfunc-mode} for putting a function in the
header line.  This mode recycles the stickyfunc configuration
classes list.

With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end defun

@defun semantic-highlight-func-current-tag-face
@anchor{semantic-highlight-func-current-tag-face}
Face used to show the top of current function.
@end defun

@node Tag Decoration Mode
@subsection Tag Decoration Mode
@cindex semantic-decoration-mode

Decoration mode is a harness that allows any parsed tag to be
decorated based on some arbitrary feature of that tag.  Decoration
mode is actually a full harness for providing any kind of decoration
on a tag based on a prefix function.

@deffn Command semantic-decoration-mode &optional arg
@anchor{semantic-decoration-mode}
Minor mode for decorating tags.
Decorations are specified in @code{semantic-decoration-styles}.
You can define new decoration styles with
@dfn{define-semantic-decoration-style}.
With prefix argument @var{arg}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

To enable or disable specific decorations, you can use this function:

@deffn Command semantic-toggle-decoration-style name &optional arg
@anchor{semantic-toggle-decoration-style}
Turn on/off the decoration style with @var{name}.
Decorations are specified in @code{semantic-decoration-styles}.
With prefix argument @var{arg}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.
Return non-@code{nil} if the decoration style is enabled.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Available decoration modes

There are several decoration modes that comes with semantic.

@defun Command semantic-tag-boundary-mode &optional arg
Place an overline in front of each long tag.

@deffn Option semantic-tag-boundary-face
@anchor{semantic-tag-boundary-face}
Face used to show long tags in.
Used by decoration style: @code{semantic-tag-boundary}.
@end deffn

@end defun


@defun Command semantic-decoration-on-private-members-mode &optional arg
Highlight class members that are designated as PRIVATE access.

@deffn Option semantic-decoration-on-private-members-face
@anchor{semantic-decoration-on-private-members-face}
Face used to show privately scoped tags in.
Used by the decoration style: @code{semantic-decoration-on-private-members}.
@end deffn
@end defun

@defun Command semantic-decoration-on-protected-members-mode &optional arg
Highlight class members that are designated as PROTECTED access.

@deffn Option semantic-decoration-on-protected-members-face
@anchor{semantic-decoration-on-protected-members-face}
Face used to show protected scoped tags in.
Used by the decoration style: @code{semantic-decoration-on-protected-members}.
@end deffn
@end defun

@deffn Command semantic-decoration-on-includes  &optional arg
Highlight class members that are includes.
This mode provides a nice context menu on the include statements.
Use the menus to ask questions and get help on configuring semantic.

@deffn Option semantic-decoration-on-includes
@anchor{semantic-decoration-on-includes}
Overlay Face used on includes that are not in some other state.
Used by the decoration style: @code{semantic-decoration-on-includes}.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-decoration-on-unknown-includes
@anchor{semantic-decoration-on-unknown-includes}
Face used to show includes that cannot be found.
Used by the decoration style: @code{semantic-decoration-on-unknown-includes}.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-decoration-on-unparsed-includes
@anchor{semantic-decoration-on-unparsed-includes}
Face used to show includes that have not yet been parsed.
Used by the decoration style: @code{semantic-decoration-on-unparsed-includes}.
@end deffn

@end deffn

@subsubsection Create New Decoration Modes

You can create new types of decorations using the following function:

@defun define-semantic-decoration-style name doc &rest flags
@anchor{define-semantic-decoration-style}
Define a new decoration style with @var{name}.
@var{doc} is a documentation string describing the decoration style @var{name}.
It is appended to auto-generated doc strings.
An Optional list of @var{flags} can also be specified.  Flags are:
  @code{:enabled} <value>  - specify the default enabled value for @var{name}.


This defines two new overload functions respectively called @code{NAME-p}
and @code{NAME-highlight}, for which you must provide a default
implementation in respectively the functions @code{NAME-p-default} and
@code{NAME-highlight-default}.  Those functions are passed a tag.  @code{NAME-p}
must return non-@code{nil} to indicate that the tag should be decorated by
@code{NAME-highlight}.

To put primary decorations on a tag @code{NAME-highlight} must use
functions like @dfn{semantic-set-tag-face}, @dfn{semantic-set-tag-intangible},
etc., found in the semantic-decorate library.

To add other kind of decorations on a tag, @code{NAME-highlight} must use
@dfn{semantic-decorate-tag}, and other functions of the semantic
decoration @var{api} found in this library.
@end defun


@node MRU Bookmarks Mode
@subsection MRU Bookmarks Mode
@cindex semantic-mru-bookmark-mode

MRU stands for Most Recently Used.  Semantic MRU Bookmarks track the
tags you edit and maintain a ring of things you've been working on.
You can then switch back to tags you've worked on recently by name.

@deffn Command semantic-mru-bookmark-mode &optional arg
@anchor{semantic-mru-bookmark-mode}
Minor mode for tracking tag-based bookmarks automatically.
Tag based bookmarks a tracked based on editing and viewing habits
and can then be navigated via the @var{mru} bookmark keymap.

With prefix argument @var{arg}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

Once this mode is enabled, any edit, or mark setting will add the
current tag to your MRU bookmark ring.

@table @kbd
@item C-x B
This keysequence is like @code{switch-to-buffer}, but uses a capital
@kbd{B} instead of lower case.  This lets you type in a tag name, or
use @kbd{M-p} and @kbd{M-n} to cycle through the bookmark list in
MRU order.
@end table



@node Highlight Edits Mode
@subsection Highlight Edits Mode

Highlight edits mode is useful mostly for debugging the incremental
parser.  As you change text, that effected text is highlighted, and
you can visual predict what actions the incremental parser will need
to make.

@deffn Command semantic-highlight-edits-mode &optional arg
Minor mode for highlighting changes made in a buffer.
Changes are tracked by semantic so that the incremental parser can work
properly.
With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

@deffn Face semantic-highlight-edits-face
Face used to show dirty tokens in @code{semantic-highlight-edits-mode}.
@end deffn

@node Parser State
@subsection Parser State

@deffn Command semantic-show-parser-state-mode &optional arg
Minor mode for displaying parser cache state in the modeline.
The cache can be in one of three states.  They are
Up to date, Partial reparse needed, and Full reparse needed.
The state is indicated in the modeline with the following characters:
@table @code
@item -
The cache is up to date.
@item !
The cache requires a full update.
@item ~
The cache needs to be incrementally parsed.
@item %
The buffer is not lexically parseable.
@item @@
Auto-parse in progress (not set here.)
@end table
With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

@node Unmatched Syntax Highlighting
@subsection Unmatched Syntax Highlighting

@deffn Command semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-mode &optional arg
Minor mode to highlight unmatched syntax tokens.
When a parser executes, some elements in the buffer may not match any
parser rules.  These text characters are considered unmatched syntax.
Often time, the display of unmatched syntax can expose coding
problems before the compiler is run.

With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.

@kbd{C-c , `}		@dfn{semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-next}
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-unmatched-syntax-face
Face used to show unmatched-syntax in.
The face is used in  @dfn{semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-mode}.
@end deffn

