\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c $Id: eieio.texi,v 1.53 2005/04/03 16:09:19 zappo Exp $
@c

@c
@c THIS MANUAL NEEDS WORK:
@c
@c See the comments at the end of this document.
@c they need to be integrated into the text of this manual.
@c
@setfilename eieio.info
@settitle Enhanced Implementation of Emacs Interpreted Objects

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* eieio: (eieio).       Objects for Emacs
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@center @titlefont{eieio}
@vskip 0pt plus 1 fill
Copyright @copyright{} 1995,1996,1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Eric M. Ludlam
@end titlepage


@node Top, , , (dir)Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

EIEIO is a framework for writing object oriented applications in emacs
lisp, and is a result of my taking various object oriented classes at
work and my attempt to understand some of it better by implementing it.
The real reason I started eieio is because someone in one of my classes
said "I bet emacs can't do that!".  Well then, I just had to prove them
wrong!

@menu
* Introduction::          Why use eieio?  Basic overview, samples list.
* CLOS compatibility::    What are the differences?
* Building Classes::      How to write new class structures.
* Default Superclass::    The root superclasses.
* Making New Objects::    How to construct new objects.
* Accessing Slots::       How to access a slot.
* Writing Methods::       How to write a CLOS style method.
* Predicates::            Class-p, Object-p, etc-p.
* Association Lists::     List of objects as association lists.
* Introspection::         Looking inside a class.
* Signals::               When you make errors
* Base Classes::          Additional classes you can inherit from.
* Browsing::              Browsing your class lists.
* Class Values::          Displaying information about a class or object.
* Customizing::           Customizing objects.
* Documentation::         Automatically creating texinfo documentation
* Naming Conventions::    Name your objects in an Emacs friendly way.
* Demo Programs::         Some examples using eieio.
* Function Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction, CLOS compatibility, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Introduction


  EIEIO is a CLOS (Common Lisp Object System) compatibility layer.  Due
to restrictions in the Emacs Lisp language, CLOS cannot be completely
supported, and a few functions have been added in place of setf.

@section What EIEIO supports

@enumerate
@item
A structured framework for the creation of basic classes with attributes
and methods using singular inheritance similar to CLOS.
@item
Type checking, and slot unbinding.
@item
Method definitions similar to CLOS.
@item
Simple and complex class browsers.
@item
Edebug support for methods.
@item
Imenu updates.
@item
Byte compilation support of methods.
@item
Help system extentions for classes and methods.
@item
Automatic texinfo documentation generator.
@item
Several base classes for interesting tasks.
@item
Simple test suite.
@item
Public and private classifications for slots (extensions to CLOS)
@item
Customization support in a class (extension to CLOS)
@end enumerate

@section Issues using EIEIO

@table @asis
@item Complete @code{defclass} tag support
All CLOS tags are currently supported, but some are not currently
implemented correctly.
@item Mock object initializers
Each class contains a mock object used for fast initialization of
instantiated objects.  Using functions with side effects on object slot
values can potentially cause modifications in the mock object.  EIEIO
should use a deep copy but currently does not.
@item :AROUND method tag
This CLOS method tag is non-functional.
@end table

@section EIEIO example programs that are almost useful.

@table @asis
@item linemark
Manage line highlighting, where individual lines are given a
background color, or some other graphic feature.  Lines can be
highlighted in files not currently loaded in Emacs.  When they are
read in, the lines are given the graphic properties.

Includes an MS Visual Studio like bookmark facility.
@item lmcompile
Using linemark, highlight all lines where the latest compilation
has valid hits.
@item tree
Draw a structured tree by building a series of embedded lists of
`tree-node' class objects.  Includes the functions `eieio-class-tree' to
browse your current eieio inheritance structure
@item call-tree
Pass it an Emacs Lisp function (not byte compiled) to generate a call tree
using the tree tool
@item chart
Uses eieio to manage charts/axis/sequences, and allows display of simple
bar-charts.  Example programs are available displaying emacs memory
usage and list occupation, in addition to file counts and size charts.
There's even a sample that will display a chart of who sends you the most
email!  See doc-string for `chart-bar-quickie' to make your own bar
charts easily.
@item eieio-speedbar
Classes for implementing a speedbar display.  If you write a program
that uses a system of objects, and your classes inherit from those in
@file{eieio-speedbar}, then you can write a speedbar display for your
objects in very little time. @ref{eieio-speedbar}
@end table

@section EIEIO wish list

@enumerate
@item
More CLOS compatibility.
@item
Integrate the desired built-in methods into the object browser.
@item
Create some objects over pre-existing emacs-lisp stuff for fun, like
faces, processes, buffers, frames and windows as examples.
@end enumerate

@node CLOS compatibility, Building Classes, Introduction, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter CLOS compatibility

As you read this, it is important to know that I have just recently
learned some of the CLOS syntax, but have never used it myself outside
of the EIEIO framework.  I'm primarily and Emacs Lisp hacker who wrote
EIEIO to help myself learn some of the mechanics of Object Oriented
programming.

Currently, the following functions should behave almost as expected from
CLOS.

@table @code
@item defclass
All slot keywords are available but not all work correctly.
Slot keyword differences are:

@table @asis
@item :reader, and :writer tags
Create methods that throw errors instead of creating an unqualified
method.  You can still create new ones to do its business.
@item :accessor
This should create an unqualified method to access a slot, but
instead pre-builds a method that gets the slot's value.
@item :type
Specifier uses the @code{typep} function from the @file{cl}
package.  @xref{(cl)Type Predicates}. It therefore has the same issues as
that package.  Extensions include the ability to provide object names.
@end table

Defclass also supports class options, but does not currently use values
of @code{:metaclass}, and @code{:default-initargs}.

@item make-instance
Make instance works as expected, however it just uses the EIEIO instance
creator automatically generated when a new class is created.
@xref{Making New Objects}.
@item defgeneric
Creates the desired symbol, and accepts all of the expected arguments
except @code{:AROUND}.
@item defmethod
Calls defgeneric, and accepts most of the expected arguments.  Only the
first argument to the created method may be type cast, though any
argument can be syntactically type cast.  (And promptly ignored)  To
type cast against a class, the class must exist before defmethod is
called. In addition, the @code{:AROUND} tag is not supported.
@item call-next-method
Inside a method, calls the next available method up the inheritance tree
for the given object.  This is different than that found in CLOS because
in EIEIO this function accepts replacement arguments.  This permits
subclasses to modify arguments as they are passed up the tree.  If no
arguments are given, the expected CLOS behavior is used.
@item setf
If the common-lisp subsystem is loaded, the setf parameters are also
loaded so the form @code{(setf (slot-value object slot) t)} should
work.
@end table

CLOS supports the @code{describe} command, but eieio only provides
@code{eieio-describe-class}, and @code{eieio-describe-generic}.  These
functions are adviced into @code{describe-variable}, and
@code{describe-function}.

When creating a new class (@pxref{Building Classes}) there are several
new keywords supported by EIEIO.

In EIEIO tags are in lower case, not mixed case.

@node Building Classes, Default Superclass, CLOS compatibility, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Building Classes

A class in EIEIO has a similar structure to that found in other
languages.  A new class is created with @code{defclass}

@defun defclass class-name superclass-list slot-list options-or-doc

This function is specified by CLOS, and EIEIO conforms in structure.

Creates a new class called @code{class-name}. The created variable's
documentation string is set to a modified version of the doc string
found in @var{options-or-doc}.  Each time a slot is defined the
variables documentation string is updated to include the methods
documentation as well.

The parent class for @code{class-name} is @var{superclass-list} which
must be a list.  Each element of this list must be a class.  These
classes form the parents of the class being created.  Every slot in
parent is replicated in the new class.  If two parents share the same
slot name, the parent which appears in the list first sets the attributes
for that slot.  If a slot in the new class' slot list matches a parent,
then the new specifications for the child class override that of the
parent.

@var{slot-list} is a list of lists.  Each sublist defines an attribute.
These lists are of the form @code{(name :tag1 value1 :tag2 value2 :tagn
valuen)}.  Some valid CLOS tags are:

@table @code
@item :initarg
The argument used during initialization.  @xref{Making New Objects}.
A good symbol to use for initarg is one that starts with a colon @code{:}.
@item :initform
A lisp expression used to generate the default value for this slot.
If :initform is left out, that slot defaults to being unbound.
The value passed to initform is automatically quoted.  Thus,
@example
:initform (1 2 3)
@end example
appears as the specified list in the default object.
A function like this:
@example
:initform +
@end example
is quoted in as a symbol.

@c This feature was more annoying than useful.  Use the
@c `initialize-instance' function to do this.
@c
@c On the other hand, if you need code to be
@c executed at instantiation time as the initform, code like this:
@c @example
@c :initform (lambda () (+ 1 some-global-var))
@c @end example
@c will be identified as a function call, and be executed in place.

@cindex lambda-default
Lastly, using the function @code{lambda-default} instead of
@code{lambda} will let you specify a lambda expression to use as the
value, without evaluation.
@item :type
An unquoted type specifier used to validate data set into this slot.
@xref{(cl)Type Predicates}.
Here are some examples:
 @table @code
 @item symbol
 A symbol.
 @item number
 A number type
 @item my-class-name
 An object of your class type.
 @item (or null symbol)
 A symbol, or nil.
 @item function
 A function symbol, or a @code{lambda-default} expression.
 @end table
@item :allocation
Either :class or :instance (defaults to :instance) used to
specify how data is stored.  Slots stored per instance have unique
values for each object.  Slots stored per class have shared values for
each object.  If one object changes a :class allocated slot, then all
objects for that class gain the new value.
@item :documentation
Documentation detailing the use of this slot.  This documentation is
exposed when the user describes a class, and during customization of an
object.
@end table

Some tags whose behaviors do not yet match CLOS are:

@table @code
@item :accessor
Name of a generic function which can be used to fetch the value of this slot.
You can call this function later on your object and retrieve the value
of the slot.
@item :writer
Name of a generic function which will write this slot.
@item :reader
Name of a generic function which will read this slot.
@end table

Some tags which are unique to EIEIO are:

@table @code
@item :custom
A custom :type specifier used when editing an object of this type.
See documentation for @code{defcustom} for details.  This specifier is
equivalent to the :type field of a @code{defcustom} call.
@item :label
When customizing an object, the value of :label will be used instead
of the slot name.  This enables better descriptions of the data than
would usually be afforded.
@item :group
Similar to @code{defcustom}'s :group command, this organizes different
slots in an object into groups.  When customizing an object, only the
slots belonging to a specific group need be worked with, simplifying the
size of the display.
@item :protection
A CLOS unsupported specifier which indicates that only methods of this
class may access this slot.

When using a slot referencing function, if the value behind @var{slot}
is private or protected, then the current scope of operation must be
within a method of the calling object.

Valid values are:

@table @code
@item :public
Anyone may access this slot from any scope.
@item :protected
Only methods of the same class, or of a child class may access this
slot.
@item :private
Only methods of the same class as this slot's definition may access
this slot.
@end table

@end table

Additionally, CLOS style class options are available.  These are various
options attached to a class.  These options can occur in place or in
addition to a documentation string.  If both occur, then the options
appear before the documentation string.  In CLOS, documentation is one
of the options available to a class, so the ability to have a standalone
documentation string is specific to Emacs.  

Possible class options are:
@table @code
@item :documentation
Doc string to use for this class.  If an Emacs style documentation
string is also provided, then this option is ignored.
@item :allow-nil-initform
This is not a CLOS option.

If this option is non-nil, and the @code{:initform} is @code{nil}, but
the @code{:type} is specifies something such as @code{string} then allow
this to pass.  The default is to have this option be off.  This is
implemented as an alternative to unbound slots.
@item :abstract
This is not a CLOS option.

Tags a class as being abstract, or uninstantiable.
@item :custom-groups
This is a list of groups that can be customized within this class.  This
slot is auto-generated when a class is created and need not be
specified.  It can be retrieved with the @code{class-option} command,
however, to see what groups are available.
@item :metaclass
Unsupported CLOS option.  Enables the use of a different base class other
than @code{standard-class}.
@item :default-initargs
Unsupported CLOS option.  Specifies a list of initargs to be used when
creating new objects.  As far as I can tell, this duplicates the
function of @code{:initform}.
@end table

@xref{CLOS compatibility}, for more details on CLOS tags versus EIEIO
specific tags.

The whole definition may look like this:
@example
(defclass data-object ()
  ((value :initarg :value
	  :initform nil
	  :accessor get-value
	  :documentation
          "Lisp object which represents the data this object maintains."
	  :protection :protected)
   (reference :initarg :reference
	      :initform nil
              :type list
              :custom (repeat object)
	      :documentation
              "List of objects looking at this object.
The method `update-symbol' is called for each member of `reference' whenever 
`value' is modified."
	      :protection :protected)
   )
  "Data object which tracks referencers.")
@end example

@end defun

@defvar eieio-error-unsupported-class-tags
If Non-nil, then @code{defclass} will throw an error if a tag
in a slot specifier is unsupported.
@end defvar

@node Default Superclass, Making New Objects, Building Classes, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Default Superclass

All defined classes, if created as a superclass (With no specified
parent class) will actually inherit from a special superclass stored in
@code{eieio-default-superclass}.  This superclass is actually quite
simple, but with it, certain default methods or attributes can be added
to all objects at any time, without updating their code in the future
(If there is a change).  In CLOS, this would be named
@code{STANDARD-CLASS} and is aliased.

Currently, the default superclass is defined as follows:

@example
(defclass eieio-default-superclass nil
  nil
  )
 "Default class used as parent class for superclasses.  It's
slots are automatically adopted by such superclasses but not stored
in the `parent' slot.  When searching for attributes or methods, when
the last parent is found, the search will recurse to this class.")
@end example

When creating an object of any type, you can use it's constructor, or
@code{make-instance}.  This, in turns calls the method
@code{initialize-instance}, which then calls the method
@code{shared-initialize}.

@defun initialize-instance obj &rest slots
Initialize @var{obj}.  Sets slots of @var{obj} with @var{slots} which
is a list of name/value pairs.  These are actually just passed to
@code{shared-initialize}.
@end defun

@defun shared-initialize obj &rest slots
Sets slots of @var{obj} with @var{slots} which is a list of name/value
pairs.
@end defun

These methods are used to override errors:

@defun slot-missing object slot operation &optional new-value
This method is called when there is an attempt to access a slot that
does not exist for a given object.  The default method signals an error
of type @code{invalid-slot-name}.  @xref{Signals}.

You may override this behavior, but it is not expected to return in the
current implementation.

This function takes arguments in a different order than in CLOS.
@end defun

@defun slot-unbound object class slot-name fn
This method is called when there is an attempt to access a slot that is
not bound.  This will throw an @code{unbound-slot} signal.  If
overridden it's return value will be returned from the function
attempting to reference its value.
@end defun

@defun no-applicable-method object method
This method is called when there is an attempt to call a method on
@var{object} when there is no method to call.  The default method throws
a @code{no-method-definition} signal.  The return value of this function
becomes the return value of the non-existent method.
@end defun

@defun no-next-method object args
This method is called when an attempt to call @code{call-next-method} is
made, and there is no next method that can be called.    The return
value becomes the return value of @code{call-next-method}.
@end defun

Additional useful methods are:

@defun clone obj &rest params
Make a deep copy of @var{obj}.  Once this copy is made, make
modifications specified by @var{params}.  @var{params} uses the same
format as the @var{slots} of @code{initialize-instance}.  The only
other change is to modify the name with an incrementing numeric.
@end defun

@defun object-print obj &rest strings
Construct a printing lisp symbol for @var{OBJ}.  This would look like:
@example
 #<class-name "objname">
@end example
STRINGS are additional parameters passed in by overloading functions to
add more data into the printing abbreviation.

@example
(defclass data-object ()
   (value)
   "Object containing one data slot.")

(defmethod object-print ((this data-object) &optional strings)
  "Return a string with a summary of the data object as part of the name."
  (apply 'call-next-method this 
	 (cons (format " value: %s" (render this)) strings)))
@end example

here is what some output could look like:
@example
(object-print test-object)
   => #<data-object test-object value: 3>
@end example
@end defun

@defun object-write obj &optional comment
Write @var{obj} onto a stream in a readable fashion.  The resulting
output will be lisp code which can be used with @code{read} and
@code{eval} to recover the object.  Only slots with @code{:initarg}s
are written to the stream.
@end defun

@node Making New Objects, Accessing Slots, Default Superclass, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Making New Objects

Once we have defined our classes, it's time to create objects with the
specified structure.  After we call @code{defclass} two new functions
are created, one of which is @code{classname}.  Thus, from the example at
the end of the previous chapter @xref{Building Classes}, we would have
the functions @code{data-object} and @code{data-object-p}.

@defun classname object-name &rest slots

This creates and returns a new object.  This object is not assigned to
anything, and will be garbage collected if not saved.  This object will
be given the string name @var{object-name}.  There can be multiple
objects of the same name, but the name slot provides a handy way to
keep track of your objects.  @var{slots} is just all the slots you
wish to preset.  Any slot set as such WILL NOT get it's default value,
and any side effects from an attributes default function will not occur.
An example pair would appear simply as @code{:value 1}.  Of course you
can do any valid lispy thing you want with it, such as
@code{:value (if (boundp 'special-symbol) special-symbol nil)}

Example of creating an object from a class, @ref{Building Classes}:

@example
(data-object "test" :value 3 :reference nil)
@end example

@end defun

@node Accessing Slots, Writing Methods, Making New Objects, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Accessing Slots

There are several ways to access slot values in an object.  The naming
convention and argument order is similar to that found in Emacs Lisp for
referencing vectors.  The basics for referencing, setting, and calling
methods are all accounted for.

@defun oset object slot value

This sets the value behind @var{slot} to @var{value} in @var{object}.
@code{oset} returns @var{value}.
@end defun

@defun oset-default class slot value

This sets the slot @var{slot} in @var{class} which is initialized with
the @code{:initform} tag to @var{value}.  This will allow a user to set
both public and private defaults after the class has been constructed.
This function is intrusive, and is offered as a way to allow users to
configure the default behavior of packages built with classes the same
way @code{setq-default} is used for buffer-local variables.

For example, if a user wanted all @code{data-objects} (@pxref{Building
Classes}) to inform a special object of his own devising when they
changed, this can be arranged by simply executing this bit of code:

@example
(oset-default data-object reference (list my-special-object))
@end example

@end defun

@defun oref object slot

This recalls the value in slot @var{slot} in @var{object} and returns
it.  If @var{object} is a class, and @var{slot} is a class allocated
slot, then oref will return that value.  If @var{object} is a class, and
@var{slot} is not class allocated, a signal will be thrown.
@end defun

@defun oref-default object slot
This gets the default value in @var{object}'s class definition for
@code{slot}.  This can be different from the value returned by
@code{oref}.  @var{object} can also be a class symbol or an instantiated
object.
@end defun

These next accessors are defined by CLOS to reference or modify slot
values, and use the previously mentioned set/ref routines.

@defun slot-value object slot
This function retrieves the value of @var{slot} from @var{object}.
Unlike @code{oref}, the symbol for @var{slot} must be quoted in.
@end defun

@defun set-slot-value object slot value
This is not a CLOS function, but is meant to mirror @code{slot-value} if
you don't want to use the cl package's @code{setf} function.  This
function sets the value of @var{slot} from @var{object}.  Unlike
@code{oset}, the symbol for @var{slot} must be quoted in.
@end defun

@defun slot-makeunbound object slot
This function unbinds @var{slot} in @var{object}.  Referencing an
unbound slot can throw an error.
@end defun

@defun object-add-to-list object slot &optional append
In @var{OBJECT}'s @var{SLOT}, add @var{ITEM} to the pre-existing list of elements.
Optional argument @var{APPEND} indicates we need to append to the list.
If @var{ITEM} already exists in the list in @var{SLOT}, then it is not added.
Comparison is done with @dfn{equal} through the @dfn{member} function call.
If @var{SLOT} is unbound, bind it to the list containing @var{ITEM}.
@end defun

@defun with-slots entries object forms
Bind @var{entries} lexically to the specified slot values in
@var{object}, and execute @var{forms}.  In CLOS, it would be possible to
set values in OBJECT by using @code{setf} to assign to these values, but
in Emacs, you may only read the values, or set the local variable to a
new value.

@example
(defclass myclass () (x :initarg 1))
(setq mc (make-instance 'myclass))
(with-slots (x) mc x)                      => 1
(with-slots ((something x)) mc something)  => 1
@end example
@end defun

@node Writing Methods, Predicates, Accessing Slots, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Writing Methods

Writing a CLOS style method is similar to writing a function.  The
differences are that there are some extra options and there can be
multiple implementations of a single method which interact interestingly
with each other.

Each method created verifies that there is a @dfn{generic method}
available to attach to.  A generic method has no body, and is merely a
symbol upon which methods are attached.

@defun defgeneric method arglist [doc-string]

@var{method} is the unquoted symbol to turn into a function.
@var{arglist} is the default list of arguments to use (not implemented yet).
@var{doc-string} is the documentation used for this symbol.

A generic function acts as a place holder for methods.  There is no need
to call @code{defgeneric} yourself, as @code{defmethod} will call it if
necessary.  Currently the argument list is unused.

@code{defgeneric} will prevent you from turning an existing emacs lisp
function into a generic function.
@end defun

@defun defmethod method [:BEFORE | :PRIMARY | :AFTER | :STATIC ] arglist [doc-string] forms

@var{method} is the name of the function to be created.

@var{:BEFORE | :AFTER} represent when this form is to be called.  If
neither of these symbols are present, then the default priority is,
before @var{:AFTER}, after @var{:BEFORE}, and is represented in CLOS as
@var{PRIMARY}.

If @var{:STATIC} is used, then the first argument when calling this
function can be a class or an object.  Never treat the first argument
of a STATIC method as an object, always used @code{oref-default} or
@code{oset-default}.  A Class' construction is defined as a static
method.

@code{arglist} is the argument list.  Unlike CLOS, only the FIRST
argument may be type-cast, and it may only be type-cast to an EIEIO
object.  An arglist such as @code{(a b)} would classify the function
as generic call, which has no object it can talk to (none is passed
in) and merely allows the creation of side-effects.  If the arglist
appears as @code{((this data-object) b)} then the form is stored as
belonging to the class @code{data-object}.

The first argument does not need to be typecast.  A method with no
typecast is a @code{generic}.  If a given class has no implementation,
then the generic will be called when that method is used on a given
object of that class.

If two @code{defmethod}s appear with arglists such as @code{(a b)}
and @code{(c d)} then one of the implementations will be overwritten,
but generic and multiple type cast arglists can co-exist.

When called, if there is a method cast against the object's parent
class, but not for that object's class, the parent class' method will be
called.  If there is a method defined for both, only the child's method
is called.

@var{doc-string} is the documentation attached to the implementation.
All method doc-strings are concatenated into the generic method's
function documentation.

@var{forms} is the body of the function.

If multiple methods and generics are defined for the same method name,
they are executed in this order:

@table @asis
@item method :BEFORE
@item generic :BEFORE
@item method :PRIMARY
@item generic :PRIMARY
@item method :AFTER
@item generic :AFTER
@end table
@end defun

If in any situation a method does not exist, but a generic does, then
the generic is called in place of the method.

If no methods exist, then the signal @code{no-method-definition} is
thrown. @ref{Signals}

See the file @file{eieio-test.el} for an example testing these
differently tagged methods.

@defun call-next-method &rest replacement-args

While running inside a CLOS method, calling this function will call the
method associated with the parent of the class of the currently running
method with the same parameters.

If no next method is available, but a generic is implemented for the
given key (Such as @code{:BEFORE}), then the generic will be called.

OPTIONAL arguments @var{replacement-args} can be used to replace the
arguments the next method would be called with.  Useful if a child class
wishes to add additional behaviors through the modification of the
parameters.  This is not a feature of CLOS.

For example code @xref{Default Superclass}.

@end defun

@defun call-next-method-p

Return t if there is a next method we can call.

@end defun

In this implementation, not all features of CLOS exist.

@enumerate
@item
There is currently no :AROUND tag.
@item
CLOS allows multiple sets of type-cast arguments, where eieio only
allows the first argument to be cast.
@end enumerate

@node Predicates, Association Lists, Writing Methods, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Predicates and Utilities

Now that we know how to create classes, access slots, and define
methods, it might be useful to verify that everything is doing ok.  To
help with this a plethora of predicates have been created.

@defun class-v class
Return a vector with all the class's important parts in it.  This vector
is not a copy.  Changing this vector changes the class.  The CLOS method
@code{find-class} will have the same effect.
@end defun

@defun find-class symbol &optional errorp
CLOS function.  In EIEIO it returns the vector definition of the class.
If there is no class, @code{nil} is returned if @var{errorp} is
@code{nil}.
@end defun

@defun class-p class
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{class} is a class type.
@end defun

@defun object-p obj
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{obj} is an object.
@end defun

@defun slot-exists-p obj-or-class slot
Return Non-@code{nil} if @var{obj-or-class} contains @var{slot} in its class.
@end defun

@defun slot-boundp object slot
Non-@code{nil} if OBJECT's @var{SLOT} is bound.
Setting a slot's value makes it bound.  Calling @dfn{slot-makeunbound} will
make a slot unbound.
@var{OBJECT} can be an instance or a class.
@end defun

@defun class-name class
Return a string of the form #<class myclassname> which should look
similar to other lisp objects like buffers and processes.  Printing a
class results only in a symbol.  
@end defun

@defun class-option class option
Return the value in @var{CLASS} of a given @var{OPTION}.
For example:

@example
(class-option eieio-default-superclass :documentation)
@end example

Will fetch the documentation string for @code{eieio-default-superclass}.
@end defun

@defun class-constructor class
Return a symbol used as a constructor for @var{class}.  This way you can
make an object of a passed in class without knowing what it is.  This is
not a part of CLOS.
@end defun

@defun object-name obj
Return a string of the form #<object-class myobjname> for @var{obj}.
This should look like lisp symbols from other parts of emacs such as
buffers and processes, and is shorter and cleaner than printing the
object's vector.  It is more useful to use @code{object-print} to get
and object's print form, as this allows the object to add extra display
information into the symbol.
@end defun

@defun object-class obj
Returns the class symbol from @var{obj}.
@end defun

@defun class-of obj
CLOS symbol which does the same thing as @code{object-class}
@end defun

@defun object-class-fast obj
Same as @code{object-class} except this is a macro, and no
type-checking is performed.
@end defun

@defun object-class-name obj
Returns the symbol of @var{obj}'s class.
@end defun

@defun class-parents class
Returns the direct parents class of @var{class}.  Returns @code{nil} if
it is a superclass.
@end defun

@defun class-parents-fast class
Just like @code{class-parent} except it is a macro and no type checking
is performed.
@end defun

@defun class-parent class
Deprecated function which returns the first parent of @var{class}.
@end defun

@defun class-children class
Return the list of classes inheriting from @var{class}.
@end defun

@defun class-children-fast class
Just like @code{class-children}, but with no checks.
@end defun

@defun same-class-p obj class
Returns @code{t} if @var{obj}'s class is the same as @var{class}.
@end defun

@defun same-class-fast-p obj class
Same as @code{same-class-p} except this is a macro and no type checking
is performed.
@end defun

@defun object-of-class-p obj class
Returns @code{t} if @var{obj} inherits anything from @var{class}.  This
is different from @code{same-class-p} because it checks for inheritance.
@end defun

@defun child-of-class-p child class
Returns @code{t} if @var{child} is a subclass of @var{class}.
@end defun

@defun generic-p method-symbol
Returns @code{t} if @code{method-symbol} is a generic function, as
opposed to a regular emacs list function.
@end defun

It is also important to note, that for every created class, a two
predicates are created for it.  Thus in our example, the function
@code{data-object-p} is created, and return @code{t} if passed an object
of the appropriate type.  Also, the function @code{data-object-child-p}
is created which returns @code{t} if the object passed to it is of a
type which inherits from @code{data-object}.

@node Association Lists, Introspection, Predicates, Top
@chapter Association Lists

Lisp offers the concept of association lists, with primitives such as
@code{assoc} used to access them.  Eieio provides a few such functions
to help with using lists of objects easily.

@defun object-assoc key slot list
Returns the first object in @var{list} for which @var{key} is in
@var{slot}.
@end defun

@defun object-assoc-list slot list
Return an association list generated by extracting @var{slot} from all
objects in @var{list}.  For each element of @var{list} the @code{car} is
the value of @var{slot}, and the @code{cdr} is the object it was
extracted from.  This is useful for generating completion tables.
@end defun

@defun eieio-build-class-alist &optional base-class
Returns an alist of all currently defined classes.  This alist is
suitable for completion lists used by interactive functions to select a
class.  The optional argument @var{base-class} allows the programmer to
select only a subset of classes to choose from should it prove
necessary.
@end defun

@node Introspection, Signals, Association Lists, Top
@chapter Introspection

Introspection permits a programmer to peek at the contents of a class
without any previous knowledge of that class.  While EIEIO implements
objects on top of vectors, and thus everything is technically visible,
some functions have been provided.  None of these functions are a part
of CLOS.

@defun object-slots obj
Return the list of public slots for @var{obj}.
@end defun

@defun class-slot-initarg class slot
For the given @var{class} return the :initarg associated with
@var{slot}.  Not all slots have initargs, so the return value can be
nil.
@end defun

@node Signals, Base Classes, Introspection, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Signals

There are new signal types that can be caught when using eieio.

@deffn Signal invalid-slot-name obj-or-class slot
This signal is called when an attempt to reference a slot in an
@var{obj-or-class} is made, and the @var{slot} is not defined for
it.
@end deffn

@deffn Signal no-method-definition method arguments
This signal is called when @var{method} is called, with @var{arguments}
and nothing is resolved.  This occurs when @var{method} has been
defined, but the arguments make it impossible for eieio to determine
which method body to run.

Overload the method @code{no-method-definition} to protect against this
signal.
@end deffn

@deffn Signal no-next-method class arguments
This signal is called if the function @code{call-next-method} is called
and there is no next method to be called.

Overload the method @code{no-next-method} to protect against this signal.
@end deffn

@deffn Signal invalid-slot-type slot spec value
This signal is called when an attempt to set @var{slot} is made, and
@var{var} doesn't match the specified type @var{spec}.

In EIEIO, this is also used of a slot specifier has an invalid value
during a @code{defclass}.
@end deffn

@deffn Signal unbound-slot object class slot
This signal is called when an attempt to reference @var{slot} in
@var{object} is made, and that instance is currently unbound.
@end deffn

@node Base Classes, Browsing, Signals, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Base Classes

Asside from @code{eieio-default-superclass}, EIEIO comes with some
additional classes that you can use.  By using multiple inheritance, it
is possible to use several features at the same time.

@menu
* eieio-instance-inheritor::    Enable value inheritance between instances.
* eieio-instance-tracker::      Enable self tracking instances.
* eieio-singleton::             Only one instance of a given class.
* eieio-persistent::            Enable persistence for a class.
* eieio-named::                 Use the object name as a :name field.
* eieio-speedbar::              Enable speedbar support in your objects.
@end menu

@node eieio-instance-inheritor, eieio-instance-tracker, Base Classes, Base Classes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @code{eieio-instance-inheritor}

This class is in package @file{eieio-base}.

Instance inheritance is a mechanism whereby the value of a slot in
object instance can reference the parent instance.  If the parent's slot
value is changed, then the child instance is also changed.  If the
child's slot is set, then the parent's slot is not modified.

@deftp {Class} eieio-instance-inheritor parent-instance
A class whose instances are enabled with instance inheritance.
The @var{parent-instance} slot indicates the instance which is
considered the parent of the current instance.  Default is @code{nil}.
@end deftp

@cindex clone
To use this class, inherit from it with your own class.
To make a new instance that inherits from and existing instance of your
class, use the @code{clone} method with additional parameters
to specify local values.

@cindex slot-unbound
The @code{eieio-instance-inheritor} class works by causing cloned
objects to have all slots unbound.  This class' @code{slot-unbound}
method will cause references to unbound slots to be redirected to the
parent instance.  If the parent slot is also unbound, then
@code{slot-unbound} will throw an @code{slot-unbound} signal.

@node eieio-instance-tracker, eieio-singleton, eieio-instance-inheritor, Base Classes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

This class is in package @file{eieio-base}.

Sometimes it is useful to keep a master list of all instances of a given
class.  The class @code{eieio-instance-tracker} performs this task.

@deftp {Class} eieio-instance-tracker tracker-symbol
Enable instance tracking for this class.
The field @var{tracker-symbol} should be initialized in inheritors of
this class to a symbol created with @code{defvar}.  This symbol will
serve as the variable used as a master list of all objects of the given
class.
@end deftp

@defmethod eieio-instance-tracker initialize-instance obj fields
This method is defined as an @code{:AFTER} method.
It adds new instances to the master list.  Do not overload this method
unless you use @code{call-next-method.}
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-instance-tracker delete-instance obj
Remove @var{obj} from the master list of instances of this class.
This may let the garbage collector nab this instance.
@end defmethod

@deffn eieio-instance-tracker-find key field list-symbol
This convenience function lets you find instances.  @var{key} is the
value to search for.  @var{FIELD} is the field to compare @var{KEY}
against.  The function @code{equal} is used for comparison.
The paramter @var{list-symbol} is the variable symbol which contains the
list of objects to be searched.
@end deffn

@node eieio-singleton, eieio-persistent, eieio-instance-tracker, Base Classes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @code{eieio-singleton}

This class is in package @file{eieio-base}.

@deftp {Class} eieio-singleton
Inheriting from the singleton class will guarantee that there will
only ever be one instance of this class.  Multiple calls to
@code{make-instance} will always return the same object.
@end deftp

@node eieio-persistent, eieio-named, eieio-singleton, Base Classes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @code{eieio-persistent}

This class is in package @file{eieio-base}.

If you want an object, or set of objects to be persistent, meaning the
slot values are important to keep saved between sessions, then you will
want your top level object to inherit from @code{eieio-persistent}.

To make sure your persistent object can be moved, make sure all file
names stored to disk are made relative with
@code{eieio-persistent-path-relative}.

@deftp {Class} eieio-persistent file file-header-line
Enables persistence for instances of this class.
Slot @var{file} with initarg @code{:file} is the file name in which this
object will be saved.
Class allocated slot @var{file-header-line} is used with method
@code{object-write} as a header comment.
@end deftp

All objects can write themselves to a file, but persistent objects have
several additional methods that aid in maintaining them.

@defmethod eieio-persistent eieio-persistent-save obj &optional file
Write the object @var{obj} to its file.
If optional argument @var{file} is specified, use that file name
instead.
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-persistent eieio-persistent-path-relative obj file
Return a file name derived from @var{file} which is relative to the
stored location of @var{OBJ}.  This method should be used to convert
file names so that they are relative to the save file, making any system
of files movable from one location to another.
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-persistent object-write obj &optional comment
Like @code{object-write} for @code{standard-object}, but will derive
a header line comment from the class allocated slot if one is not
provided.
@end defmethod

@defun eieio-persistent-read filename
Read @var{filename} which contains an @code{eieio-persistent} object
previously written with @code{eieio-persistent-save}.
@end defun

@node eieio-named, eieio-speedbar, eieio-persistent, Base Classes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @code{eieio-named}

This class is in package @file{eieio-base}.

@deftp {Class} eieio-named
Object with a name.
Name storage already occurs in an object.  This object provides get/set
access to it.
@end deftp

@node eieio-speedbar, , eieio-named, Base Classes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @code{eieio-speedbar}

This class is in package @file{eieio-speedbar}.

If a series of class instances map to a tree structure, it is possible
to cause your classes to be displayable in Speedbar. @xref{Top,,,speedbar}.
Inheriting from these classes will enable a speedbar major display mode
with a minimum of effort.

@deftp {Class} eieio-speedbar buttontype buttonface
Enables base speedbar display for a class.
@cindex speedbar-make-tag-line
The slot @var{buttontype} is any of the symbols allowed by the
function @code{speedbar-make-tag-line} for the @var{exp-button-type}
argument @xref{Extending,,,speedbar}.
The slot @var{buttonface} is the face to use for the text of the string
displayed in speedbar.
The slots @var{buttontype} and @var{buttonface} are class allocated
slots, and do not take up space in your instances.
@end deftp

@deftp {Class} eieio-speedbar-directory-button buttontype buttonface
This class inherits from @code{eieio-speedbar} and initializes 
@var{buttontype} and @var{buttonface} to appear as directory level lines.
@end deftp

@deftp {Class} eieio-speedbar-file-button buttontype buttonface
This class inherits from @code{eieio-speedbar} and initializes 
@var{buttontype} and @var{buttonface} to appear as file level lines.
@end deftp

To use these classes, inherit from one of them in you class.  You can
use multiple inheritance with them safely.  To customize your class for
speedbar display, override the default values for @var{buttontype} and
@var{buttonface} to get the desired effects.

Useful methods to define for your new class include:

@defmethod eieio-speedbar eieio-speedbar-derive-line-path obj depth
Return a string representing a directory associated with an instance
of @var{obj}.  @var{depth} can be used to indice how many levels of
indentation have been opened by the user where @var{obj} is shown.
@end defmethod


@defmethod eieio-speedbar eieio-speedbar-description obj
Return a string description of @var{OBJ}.
This is shown in the minibuffer or tooltip when the mouse hovers over
this instance in speedbar.
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-speedbar eieio-speedbar-child-description obj
Return a string representing a description of a child node of @var{obj}
when that child is not an object.  It is often useful to just use
item info helper functions such as @code{speedbar-item-info-file-helper}.
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-speedbar eieio-speedbar-object-buttonname obj
Return a string which is the text displayed in speedbar for @var{obj}.
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-speedbar eieio-speedbar-object-children obj
Return a list of children of @var{obj}.
@end defmethod

@defmethod eieio-speedbar eieio-speedbar-child-make-tag-lines obj depth
This method inserts a list of speedbar tag lines for @var{obj} to
represent its children.  Implement this method for your class
if your children are not objects themselves.  You still need to
implement @code{eieio-speedbar-object-children}.

In this method, use techniques specified in the Speedbar manual.
@xref{Extending,,,speedbar}.
@end defmethod

Some other functions you will need to learn to use are:

@deffn eieio-speedbar-create make-map key-map menu name toplevelfn
Register your object display mode with speedbar.
@var{make-map} is a function which initialized you keymap.
@var{key-map} is a symbol you keymap is installed into.
@var{menu} is an easy menu vector representing menu items specific to your
object display.
@var{name} is a short string to use as a name identifying you mode.
@var{toplevelfn} is a function called which must return a list of
objects representing those in the instance system you wish to browse in
speedbar.

Read the Extending chapter in the speedbar manual for more information
on how speedbar modes work
@xref{Extending,,,speedbar}. 
@end deffn

@node Browsing, Class Values, Base Classes, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Browsing class trees

To browse all the currently loaded classes in emacs, simply run the
EIEIO browser.  @kbd{M-x eieio-browse}.  This browses all the way from
the default super-duper class eieio-default-superclass, and lists all
children in an indented tree structure.

To browse only from a specific class, pass it in as an alternate
parameter.

Here is a sample tree from our current example:

@example
eieio-default-superclass
  +--data-object
       +--data-object-symbol
@end example

Note that we start with eieio-default-superclass.  @xref{Default Superclass}.

Note: new classes are consed into the inheritance lists, so the tree
comes out upside-down.

It is also possible to use the function @code{eieio-class-tree} in the
@file{tree.el} package.  This will create an interactive tree.  Clicking
on nodes will allow expansion/contraction of branches, or editing of a
class.  @xref{Class Values}.

@node Class Values, Customizing, Browsing, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Class Values

Details about any class or object can be retrieved using the function
@code{eieio-describe-class} function.  Interactively, type in the name of
a class.  In a program, pass it a string with the name of a class, a
class symbol, or an object.  The resulting buffer will display all slot
names.

Additionally, all methods defined to have functionality on this class is
displayed.

@node Customizing, Documentation, Class Values, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@chapter Customizing Objects

In Emacs 20 a useful customization utility became available called
`custom'.  EIEIO supports custom through two new widget types.  If a
variable is declared as type @code{'object}, then full editing of slots
via the widgets is made possible.  This should be used carefully,
however, because objects modified are cloned, so if there are other
references to these objects, they will no longer be linked together.

If you want in place editing of objects, use the following methods:

@defun eieio-customize-object object
Create a custom buffer and insert a widget for editing @var{object}.  At
the end, an @code{Apply} and @code{Reset} button are available.  This
will edit the object "in place" so references to it are also changed.
There is no effort to prevent multiple edits of a singular object, so
care must be taken by the user of this function.
@end defun

@defun eieio-custom-widget-insert object flags
This method inserts an edit object into the current buffer in place.
It's sole code is @code{(widget-create 'object-edit :value object)} and
is provided as a locale for adding tracking, or specializing the widget
insert procedure for any object.
@end defun

To define a slot with an object in it, use the @code{object} tag.  This
widget type will be automatically converted to @code{object-edit} if you
do in place editing of you object.

If you want to have additional actions taken when a user clicks on the
@code{Apply} button, then overload the method @code{eieio-done-customizing}.
This method does nothing by default, but that may change in the future.
This would be the best way to make your objects persistent when using
in-place editing.

@section Widget extention

When widgets are being created, one new widget extention has been added,
called the @code{:slotofchoices}.  When this occurs in a widget
definition, all elements after it are removed, and the slot is specifies
is queried and converted into a series of constants.

@example
(choice (const :tag "None" nil)
        :slotofchoices morestuff)
@end example

and if the slot @code{morestuff} contains @code{(sym1 sym2 sym3)}, the
above example is converted into:

@example
(choice (const :tag "None" nil)
        (const sym1)
        (const sym2)
        (const sym3))
@end example

This is useful when a given item needs to be selected from a list of
items defined in this second slot.

@node Documentation, Naming Conventions, Customizing, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Documentation

It is possible to automatically create documentation for your classes in
texinfo format by using the tools in the file @file{eieio-doc.el}

@deffn Command eieiodoc-class class indexstring &optional skiplist

This will start at the current point, and created an indented menu of
all the child classes of, and including @var{class}, but skipping any
classes that might be in @var{skiplist} It will then create nodes for
all these classes, subsection headings, and indexes.

Each class will be indexed using the texinfo labeled index
@var{indexstring} which is a two letter description.
@xref{(texinfo) New Indices}.

To use this command, the texinfo macro

@example
@@defindex @@var @{ indexstring @}
@end example

@noindent
where @var{indexstring} is replaced with the two letter code.

Next, an inheritance tree will be created listing all parents of that
section's class.

Then,all the slots will be expanded in tables, and described
using the documentation strings from the code.  Default values will also
be displayed.  Only those slots with @code{:initarg} specified will be
expanded, others will be hidden.  If a slot is inherited from a parent,
that slot will also be skipped unless the default value is different.
If there is a change, then the documentation part of the slot will be
replace with an @@xref back to the parent.

Only classes loaded into emacs' memory can be documented.

@end deffn

@node Naming Conventions, Demo Programs, Documentation, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Naming Conventions

The Emacs Lisp programming manual has a great chapter programming
conventions that help keep each Emacs package working nicely with the
entire system.  @ref{(elisp)Standards} An EIEIO based program needs to
follow these conventions, while simultaneously taking advantage of the
Object Oriented features.

The below tips are things that I do when I program an EIEIO based
package.

@itemize
@item Come up with a package prefix that is relatively short.  Prefix
all classes, and methods with your prefix.  This is a standard
convention for functions and variables in Emacs.
@item Do not prefix method names with the class name.  All methods in
EIEIO are ``virtual'', and are dynamically dispatched.  Anyone can
override your methods at any time.  Your methods should be prefixed
with your package name.
@item Do not prefix slots in your class.  The slots are always locally
scoped to your class, and need no prefixing.
@item If your library inherits from other libraries of classes, you
must ``require'' that library with the @code{require} command.
@end itemize

@node Demo Programs, Function Index, Naming Conventions, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Demo Programs

There are many sample programs I have written for eieio which could
become useful components of other applications, or are good stand alone
programs providing some useful functionality.  The file, and
functionality of these appear below:

@table @code
@item tree
Maintains and displays a tree structure in a buffer.  Nodes in the tree
can be clicked on for editing, node expansion, and simple information.
Includes a sample program for showing directory trees, and to draw trees
of the eieio class structures.
@item call-tree
Parses a non-byte-compiled function, and generates a call tree from it,
and all sub-non-byte-compiled functions.  Provides protection from
recursive functions.
@item chart
Draw bar charts from data.  Examples include displaying sizes of emacs
values, file distribution, and rmail distributions.
@end table

@node Function Index,  , Demo Programs, Top
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn

@contents
@bye

@ignore
From: Richard Stallman <rms@gnu.org>
To: zappo@gnu.org
Subject: eieio manual
Reply-to: rms@gnu.org
Date: Mon, 26 Jul 2004 10:30:19 -0400

I read the eieio manual, and while it was complete enough that
I could mostly understand it, it needs a lot of work.

The general problem is that parts are still to some extent written for
people who know CLOS.  It should be written entirely for a person who
has never seen CLOS.  It is ok to include compatibility notes
describing differences from CLOS, as in the Emacs Lisp Reference
Manual.  These should come after, not before, the material
described (consider section 1.2).

It needs a lot of proofreading.  Words are capitalized in
mid-sentence.  Symbols appear without @code.  Variable names
are in all caps, sometimes with @var and sometimes without.
The name "Lisp" is written in lower case.

The text uses nonstandard terminology such as "throw an error" and
"must be quoted in".  I can understand them, but this manual should
use the normal Emacs terminology found in the Emacs Lisp Reference
Manual.

The topics should be ordered from most conceptually essential to
least.  For instance, the default ancestor class is a comparatively
unimportant topic.  Most users don't need to know about it.  So put it
near the end.  Constructors are essential basic, so they should come
earlier.

The functions initialize-instance are rather unimportant details and
should go near the end; however, I don't see that they relate to the
default ancestor class, so grouping them under that heading does not seem
right.

The methods used in case of errors are also rather minor side
issues, so they should go late in the manual.  They belong with
the new condition names.  (The correct term is "condition names",
not "signal types".)

In general, the examples are not indented right, perhaps because they
use tabs.  You must not have tab characters in Texinfo.
eieio-default-superclass has unmatched parens.

Some specific points:

There are two mysterious references to something called
`lambda-default' that is not explained.  I can't understand it.

I am not sure how initializing slots with :initform relates to
initializing slots with oset-default.  That needs to be better explained.

There seems to be a fundamental difference in usage between slots
initialized using :initform and slots that are not initialized.
This needs to be stated loud and clear in the explanation of defclass,
before you get into the specific slot list attributes.

The term "superclass" seems to be used in two inconsistent meanings.
In defclass it is synonymous with "parent class" (this is the
traditional meaning), but section 4 gives it a different meaning.
Please choose another term for the latter meaning, such as "orphan
class".  This would mean renaming eieio-default-superclass.

    Creates a new class called @code{class-name}. The created
    variable's documentation string is set to a modified version of
    the doc string found in @var{options-or-doc}.

What is "the created variable"?

    Every slot in
    parent is replicated in the new class.

Do you mean, "Every slot that appears in any parent class
is replicated in the new class"?

    The parent class for @code{class-name} is

Shouldn't that be @var?  That is not the only place.
Also, it seems strange to speak of "the" parent class
given that there can be more than one.

    @var{slot-list} is a list of lists.  Each sublist defines an attribute.
    These lists are of the form @code{(name :tag1 value1 :tag2 value2 :tagn
    valuen)}.

All those parts that can vary need @var.

    @item :initarg
    The argument used during initialization.  @xref{Making New Objects}.

The node Making New Objects does not explain :initarg.

    A lisp expression used to generate the default value for this slot.
    If :initform is left out, that slot defaults to being unbound.
    The value passed to initform is automatically quoted.  Thus,
    @example
    :initform (1 2 3)

(1 2 3) is not a valid Lisp expression: evaluating it would get an
error.  Do you mean "a Lisp object"?

    A function like this:
    @example
    :initform +
    @end example
    is quoted in as a symbol.

That is really confusing.  What does "a function like this" refer to?

     "Default class used as parent class for superclasses.  It's
    slots are automatically adopted by such superclasses but not stored

The possessive of "it" is "its".  In English, the possessive pronouns
have no apostrophe.  My, our, your, his, her, their, its.

    When creating an object of any type, you can use it's constructor, or
    @code{make-instance}.

Same problem.  Please check every occurrence of "it's".

Also, you need to explain what a constructor is.  Otherwise, this is
completely confusing to a reader who does not know.  The manual does
not explain "constructor" anywhere.  When it describes how to use
constructors, it does not use that term.

    @defun initialize-instance obj &rest slots
    Initialize @var{obj}.  Sets slots of @var{obj} with @var{slots} which
    is a list of name/value pairs.  These are actually just passed to
    @code{shared-initialize}.
    @end defun

    @defun shared-initialize obj &rest slots
    Sets slots of @var{obj} with @var{slots} which is a list of name/value
    pairs.
    @end defun

It needs to say when the programmer should call initialize-instance
and when person should call shared-initialize.

    @defun clone obj &rest params
    Make a deep copy of @var{obj}.

"Deep copy" is not defined Emacs terminology, so it needs a precise
definition.  I have a general idea what you probably mean, but I
cannot be sure of details.  Does this copy cons cells?  Does it copy
vectors?  Does it copy hash tables?  Does it copy symbols?  The manual
must say.

    @defun object-print obj &rest strings
    Construct a printing lisp symbol for @var{OBJ}.

Should that be @var{obj}?

    Once we have defined our classes, it's time to create objects with the
    specified structure.  After we call @code{defclass} two new functions
    are created, one of which is @code{classname}.

I don't think there is a function named `classname'.  The eieio sources
do not define one.  Do you mean its name is the name of the class?
If so, use @var{classname}.

    @defun classname object-name &rest slots

The symbol after @defun is the literal name of a function
you are describing.  You can't use @defun for this.

    wish to preset.  Any slot set as such WILL NOT get it's default value,

That should be @emph{will not}.  Also, "its" is misspelled here too.

    and any side effects from an attributes default function will not occur.

I am not sure what an "attributes default function" is, and I cannot
find anything in the manual that explains it.  There should be a
cross-reference here to an explanation elsewhere.

    @defun defmethod method [:BEFORE | :PRIMARY | :AFTER | :STATIC ] arglist [doc-string] forms

This needs to be @defmac.  Also, you may need to use @code inside it.

It is really confusing that names such as :BEFORE are upper-case.
Is that what CL does?

    @var{:BEFORE | :AFTER} represent when this form is to be called.  If
    neither of these symbols are present, then the default priority is,
    before @var{:AFTER}, after @var{:BEFORE}, and is represented in CLOS as
    @var{PRIMARY}.

These names are keywords, not variables; @var is wrong for them.
They should be in @code.

      Never treat the first argument
    of a STATIC method as an object, always used @code{oref-default} or
    @code{oset-default}.

I can't understand that.  However, I am sure that "a STATIC method"
needs some style change.

    @code{arglist} is the argument list.  Unlike CLOS, only the FIRST
    argument may be type-cast,

I have no idea what that means.  "Type-cast" is not standard Emacs
terminology, so you need to define it.  The manual must explain this
type-cast feature, assuming that the reader has never heard of it
before.

    If two @code{defmethod}s appear with arglists such as @code{(a b)}
    and @code{(c d)} then one of the implementations will be overwritten,

"will be overwritten" is not clear; I don't understand it.

    When called, if there is a method cast against the object's parent
    class, but not for that object's class, the parent class' method will be
    called.

I am not sure what a "method cast" is, or what it means for that to
be "against" some class.  The text has to explain this.

    If multiple methods and generics are defined for the same method name,
    they are executed in this order:

    @table @asis
    @item method :BEFORE
    @item generic :BEFORE

I can't understand that.  What are these "generics", and how does one
define them?  Apparently not with defmethod, which defines methods.
Apparently not with defgeneric, which defines a placeholder, not
something that may need to be run.

    If in any situation a method does not exist, but a generic does, then
    the generic is called in place of the method.

I can't make sense of that.  According to the previous text it would
run both of them, the method first.  So if there's no method, it would
naturally run just the generic, if the absence of a method isn't an
error.  So what information is this sentence meant to convey?
I can't figure it out.

    @defun call-next-method &rest replacement-args

    While running inside a CLOS method, calling this function will call the
    method associated with the parent of the class of the currently running
    method with the same parameters.

When would a program do this?  Should methods normally do this?

    @defun class-name class
    Return a string of the form #<class myclassname> 

That needs @samp.  Other places too.

    opposed to a regular emacs list function.

I think that should say "a regular Emacs Lisp function".

    @defun object-assoc key slot list
    Returns the first object in @var{list} for which @var{key} is in
    @var{slot}.

Is this as trivial as it sounds?  If so, please include equivalent
code not using the function, as an explanatory example.  In the
absence of that, I wonder "Is this doing something that I could not
easily code for myself"?

    In Emacs 20 a useful customization utility became available called
    `custom'.

If we install this in Emacs 21, we should take for granted that Emacs
includes Custom, and not refer to the time when it was absent.

    The below tips are things that I do when I program an EIEIO based
    package.

These are important, so they belong earlier, with defclass.

@end ignore
